Sorted (from start to end):
A 'wealthy yonth and handsome too;
A beau, a sergeant of the Guards.
(A bias worthy of our praise).
A bigot seem — a patriot —
A black reproach in every word.
A black-firocked monk, or if a hare
A bleeding roastbeef’s on the table.
A book, a walk where shadows flitted
A brace of pistols and two balls 
A classicist in such a fray.
A clue to joys beyond all measure.
A clumsy goose, and thinks to put 
A comrade’s promising career,
A cosmopolitan — or what?
A creature arid, cold, and vain.
A cross, a question-mark, a word —
A crouching huntsman, ill -concealed, 
A crowd of nymphs around her — lo!
A cue rests on the table -top.
A danger to all lovely ladies,
A decent chap — ^like you and me?
A deep economist, indeed,
A delicate green down assuming.
A dinner that was rather festive.
A down-stuffed couch are all, I think.
A dream . . . Cousine^ do you recall 
A drop of pity, you^ll forebear 
A drop of the dark fragrant stream;
A dwarf, whose tail is quite a feature,
A faddist and a firebrand.
A fairy light about her playing,
A friend in need, as you will gather —
(A friendly glass, and friendly chatter
A frosty slight; the heavens muster
A gay mazurka holds the crowd;
A gifted talker, he would chatter
A Grandison attached to cards,
A gambler who won all the stakes,
A garden river-girt, and lo!
A girl will more than once forego.
A glance at many a curious book.
A glum, and next a merry man;
A good landed proprietor,
A gossip, glutton, clown, and cheat,
A gravestone tells its mournful story.
A guest comes, an indifferent player;
A habit, Lensky.” ^"^Oh, but clearly,
A halcyon bucolic scene,
A haughty general after her.
A haughty skeleton, and that
A heart that had not felt a pang —
A holy secret, and a voice 
A horn rang out, as in a dream;
A horrid shout assails the walls
A Kantian, unspoiled and truthful,
A kindred soul, he held, was burning
A Kalmuck, spectacled and worn,
A kitchen and a fence below.
A laugh would bring the pair together?
A lexicon of snobbery
A lily of the valley blowing
A lively horse, but not too restive,
A loaf is proffered, coins are taken,
A lyre that bears a little dove;
A man of rank, his worthy father
A man of sense, I am conceding,
A mighty music down the ages.
A mirror on the moon, now waning;
A mob-cap and a dressing-gown.
A mocking demon stirs within me
A modern Regulus; at need 
A moment since, this heart was quickened 
A moment, and the pair once more
A more magnificent reward.
A Moscow winter was the thing.
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
A namby-pamby, colorless
A nice old woman, plain but pleasant.
A night of magic, and a moon . . .
A nobler page, more fine and true,
A noise off in the servants’ quarters 
A noisy brood. Not without fighting.
A northern ball in all its glory,
A note of Lensky’s composition;
A novelty framed to divert him;
A pampered boy, allured by pleasure.
A passing thought’s enduring trace
A pitch-sealed bottle they were serving 
A place for the old-fashioned splendor: 
A place is found for every guest
A pledge of every loveliness.
A poem to her on the spot.
A poppy could not match your face.”
A portrait of none else but me,
A precious pledge! The man was guided
A prize that chanced to come his way:
A proper distance to allow,
A pure love’s innocent effusion;
A regimental band is coming!
A rival, or to catch him napping.
A row of dinners, dull and sure,
A rustic view that she found fetching,
A scholar in a yellow shawl!
A serf-boy takes his dog out sleighing,
A series of fatiguing scenes.
A serving-lad hands round the cream.
A shadow, or a wife, pursues
A shaggy bear! At Tanya’s cry
A shelf of books he’s been perusing.
(A shrewd command that perfectly 
A simple monument is placed.
A simple Russian family
A slender crescent riding high.
A smile, Onegin is appealing 
A snare to maids’ imaginations)
A snowball down the hill goes tumbling
A snowdrift stirs, it falls asunder:
A soldier spouse and a campaign.
A song across the waters drifted;
A song he brings for Tanya’s pleasure.
A spider; here a red-capped skull 
A spirit brooking no dictation?
A starry host of choiring spheres 
"A story?” asked the good old woman,
A stroke of genius, nothing less.
A sudden gust of wind surprises
A summer in the country, racing 
A swarm of thoughts exempt from blame.
A sweet remembrance to ensure.
A tale of sentiment not new,
A tavern tribune, chief of rakes.
A tedious season they await
A tender father, a good master.
A thing Albani might have done;
A thing the winter could not chain;
A thought in which he acquiesced.
A thought was born, and grew, unbidden;
A tomb, a temple vowed to love,
A torrent gray with foam is pouring;
A touch, and the sharp cliffs are beveled,
A trespasser may hope for pardon.
A tumult in the Russian heart!
A very pedant in the youth.
A veteran W'ho never fails
A village view she seemed to know,
A virgin of ripe years, accepts
A wanton sigh was not worth mention:
A welcome; it was not surprising 
A white cap shows, all in a trice:
A wind -mill all alone is whirling.
A word to solace and to save me:
A worthy course of action finds: 
A wretched ghost, a foreign joke
A young girl’s ardor, clear of guile.
Abandoning his pleasant village.
About her older sister now.
About his Olga; it may be.
About the hills and meadows lying.
About the past, what’s done and gone; 
About the self-same thing, this clacking 
About the table monsters sit!
About the weather, flax, and cattle . . .”
About this common rustic view;
About: a noisy laughing host . . . 
Above her spinning-wheel’s low rattle;
Above it all, the wild applause.
Above the chess-board they will sit.
Above the domes of Moscow, dazing 
Above this modest urn there hung 
Absorbed the girl, and she was thrown 
Accomplished as a vile coquette!
Across in safety to the path;
Across the meadowland alone,
Across the pane a shadow edges:
Admires alone Terpsichore 
Admiring glory, loving freedom,
Affected a most nasal '^'n”;
Affection’s pledge, indeed, expressing
Afraid to stop: the bear is near;
After an evening’s dissipations
After they’ve quarreled once again;
After this imexpected meeting,
Again her pale face looms before him,
Again imagination’s kindled.
Again, you’ll meet her, ’pon my life!”
Against a door, remarks with meaning 
Against the palm that holds it tight: 
Age comes to all, my darling, duly.
Aghast at time’s swift slipping sands.
Aghast, Tatyana recognized
"Agreed.” "Now that is good of you!”
"Ah, but the elegy is flighty.
Ah, dreams! where has your sweetness vanished?
Ah, friends, how I rejoiced, beholding
Ah, little feet, how I did love them!
Ah, my poor Lensky, he was made 
”Ah, nurse, I know you won’t refuse me.”
"Ah, nurse, nurse darling, I am hounded 
”Ah, nurse, your mind is not in question.
Ah, once how fast my heart would beat
Ah, spring, fair spring, the lovers’ season,
"Ah, then you know him?” "Yes, and no.”
Ah, whither, whither did you flee?
Ah, yes, at some far distant date,
Ah, yes, I knew such old wives’ tales,
Ail this is futile, and you know it,
Aind in a letter to a j&riend
Alas! by a friend’s hand was slain.
Alas! by God’s strange will we must 
Alas! the altar-fire is quenched.
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
’’Alas, poor Yorick!” he lamented,
(Alas, too salty), and observing 
Albeit still a bachelor,
All candor and all grace in you.
All children know the melody:
All covered with the brittle snow;
All crowd into the drawing-room 
All day she roams the woods and mopes.”
All during the ensuing year.
All Eugene knew is past relating.
All evening Lensky was distracted,
All greedy boredom’s progeny.
All greeted and congratulated
All hope, for aye, who enter here.”
All in good time, serene and thrifty —
All kin and kennels, crops and wine;
All labor, took to pensive ways; 
All life before us still lay fair.
All my past life has had one meaning —
All nonchalance and charm and grace,
All one might care to be or know;
All point to her, and all combine
All rise; he marches to the door.
All secrets safe. Tatyana sleeps.
All speaks of him, but to confound her;
All this is now outworn and faded,
All this lends charm to conversation.
All thoughts, but those of you, rejected.
All wish to see their daughters wed
All wonder whether they see rightly;
Allows a zest to oinr alarm.
Allured by neither looks nor station.
All’s hushed: within the parlor, sighing
Aloft, the whole of heaven sees;
Alone a lazy boatman lifted
Alone among his new possessions,
Alone the shepherd, weak and hoary.
Alone, and sunk in calculation,
Alone, Tatyana broods, and soon
Along dark streets wrapped deep in slumber
Along the forest path he crashes.
Already, ’neath the bridal crown.
Although he grew more melancholy,
Although her book has no pretensions
Although I’ve glanced at, in times gone,
Although indeed I paid attention.
Although its touch be soft as fleece.
Although I find it so expressive.
Although the house was empty, she 
Alw"ays together, now they’re sitting
Ambassador is speaking to?
Amid the snowdrifts, seething, roaring,
Among her groves and meadows ranging.
Among sad chffs he moves. I’m fated
Among the crush of people passes,
Among the tents of nomads moving.
Amusement while you mix his potion;
An album verse with tender mien;
An ardent faith in liberty.
An escort much, puffed out his chest 
An exquisite both bold and natty.
An honest fellow, be it noted.”
An idle, cheerless recluse, near
An insect in a flower sunk;
An ordered way of life, confessing 
An uhlan wooed her, not in vain;
Ancestral portraits in the gloom
And /ar niente is my law.
And a shy maiden’s pure caress.
And all distraction finds her jaded,
And all exclaim delightedly
And all seemed dull. But soon the reading
And all she looked on glistened white.
And all that Paris in her passion
And all that sparkles, triumphs, sings.
And all their w’ayward stirrings cease, 
And all, our tender dreamer fused 
And also our calm hours of leisure.
And always needing some correction,
And an eternal friendship plighted
And an old gentleman espied her,
And answer with the barest greeting.
And ardently this Muse of mine
And as a child she’d romp and play
And as a rural miss appears
And as he says farewell again 
And as it hisses, gently steaming.
And as on these his fancy dwelt,
And as she looked about, dejected, 
And as she reads, the tears will rise
And at the following sweet session
And at the stations lice and roaches
And at the window, not too grim.
And beckon to the passing sails.
And been a faithful wife and mother.
And behaved well, you will agree;
And bids his servant, since time presses,
And bids us cast away the wreath 
And blessed the darkness bringing rest.
And blessed the man who rids him of 
And blesses, as he halts his clamor,
And blissful still, since all unknowing,
And boasted, bold beyond all measure. 
And boasts the freedom of the wings,
And both, though young, could but await
And breathe the free air of the stage,
And brooklets murmured pleasantly, 
And brushes, thirty shapes and sizes.
And by the way, now that I mention
And by this shaking bridge affrighted,
And by those ashes, mourning truly,
And can you not forgive, if she
And carried to that region where
And caught that foot in these two hands;
And certain pages (fabrications,
And chats of this and that politely;
And chequered brown and gold and green, 
And cleverly convey a note.
And clinch the point with a quotation.
And closed his turbulent career 
And covering a yawn with laughter —
And coveting the fatal food;
And craved the forest’s shady boon.
And credit the world’s fair appearance; 
And crossed the girl, and as she made 
And crosses black with flocks of daws.
And curls as black as they were long.
And curses their unwelcome leisure;
And damask of the drawing-room —
And Dunya squeaks (would she were dumb!)
And dashes off. Before the morrow
And dashes uphill and is gone;
And day will brighten wold and wave,
And did his shade in sorrow yearn?
And does his somber aspect mean 
And does not cease to pine and fret.
And does not pay the least attention.
And doing with her as he will.
And doings, in a friendly fashion?
And dreaming of his exultation
And drink desire’s sweet poisoned potion.
And drop in stars upon the shore.
And drops. His clouded eyes betray
And entered. Here the throng is trooping; 
And epigrams that scored a hit.
And Eugene, when he saw these sirs —
And earn me fame and sound and fury.
And empty — so it seems to us . . .
And enters softly without rapping,
And enters the deserted court.
And every query, every tale,
And everywhere that you may turn
And fawn and play the hypocrite.
And feelings, long quiescent, stirred;
And feigned the pang of jealousy,
And fleeing, breaks the lilac-bushes,
And found a partner in another.
And found it rather hard to spell;
And found their prudent talk vexation;
And freighted with a youthful gloom 
And friendly husbands’ heavy cheer?
And friendship’s claims he was refusing.
And fright but bred fidelity;
And from the servants’ anxious eyes.
And Flyanov, somewhat ill, encumber
And fashion, or a parody?
And faster, faster throbs her heart.
And find, wherever she may sally
And fled afar . . . She followed me.
And for the pranks he liked to play
And forthwith to a ball he flew.
And found his comments sane and smart.
And grief changed to serenity.
And guard your daughters more severely.
And Grandison, who leaves us sleeping.
And gains the brookside, breathing fast.
And gave his neighbor’s ribs a dig.
And girls who kiss with laughs and hugs,
And glance, unwilling, in the glass.
And glances at the door by stealth.
And golden autumn is arriving.
And gorges seven days a week.
And gratefully to bed they creep; 
And grow, with time, intelligent.
And guards in silence all the while
And had grown ashen-cold and surly;
And had his last farewells to say.
And had no word for him but blame —
And hand meets hand, and hearts beat high; 
And hands him linen white as snow.
And hard and cold, and petrify 
And has she found the word? She lets
And having noted, in a pet.
And having stared through my lorgnette
And he was busy anyway.
And he was not the least elated 
And he will throw you in a trice.
And he would have a deal to say . . .
And health and hope and joy are banished:
And hear, above the lake, their cries,
And heedless of the winter fun.
And her head sinks. The dawn grows bolder, 
And here hussars on leave, resplendent
And his brief look of tenderness —
And his the charm of simple art.
And holding him in such affection
And hotter yet the blush is glowing
And how it strikes me, never mind).
And hurriedly before it perished
And in a voice pohte but reedy
And I can’t say the clique is wrong 
And I’ve completed Chapter One.
And integers: ourselves alone.
And its late sequel as absurd.
And I shall speak, if you allow,
And in due time the husband passed 
And in her mind a billet-doux
And in our names (and in our verses);
And in the misty moonlight furled.
And I confess I am perplexed:
And I was just thirteen years old.
And in the mist her little finger
And I am such. Was it naught better
And I’d be happy . . . more or less!
And in an attitude confiding,
And in exchange he took as well
And in the court gay magpies screamed;
And in the crowd that filled the hovel,
And in the sleigh most carefully
And into the deep forest plunges;
And it is weighted down with snow;
And its cold white magnificence:
And ivory balls, not more than two.
And I admit, in penitence,
And if that’s not enough to do,
And in the grave his bones have rest!”
And is the vernal crown of youth 
And I, all discipline refusing,
And in high London circles, they 
And in that far and savage spot
And it is %^ery hard to bear
And jealous in a frigid way.
And jealous longing frets the maid —
And kept him underneath her rule.
And know that heart will never quicken?
And lands remote, where on the breast
And let his tears unheeded shower;
And Lensky, grieving honestly,
And lean upon it with assurance . . .
And leaves the little hovel shaking , . . 
And lifts his hand as who defies
And lightly clad, though airs were chill,
And likewise do not find beguiling
And love is but the devil’s tool.
And loved the duties well fulfilled.
And love’s delicious dream, and, too,
And Lensky — Tanya; Kharlikova,
And lives like a true sage at last,
And Lensky, firm and unafraid.
And Lethe’s sluggish tide will swallow
And Lucifer’s hailed by the cock;
And likes the pallid evening light
And looks, and calls him . . . But no power
And many a solemn protestation 
And mists above the meadows brooded;
And modern man’s true soul divulging:
And more play whist, whose fame’s enduring —
And mortgaged all the land he owned.
And most, the linden-shaded ways
And murmur sing-song confidences,
And my heart whispered: it is he!
And my Zaretzky, as I said,
And near a stream, stood calm and proud, 
And neighbor wheezes unto neighbor.
And never after that went near it.
And never loved where it desired,
And never said his passions nay.
And next he dressed . . .
And next the girl’s guitar we see;
And night would find her far from sleep. 
And no calumnious friend so pert
And none can hear his neighbor speak.
And not a single w^ord deleted;
And not a station will be known
And not long years of separation,
And not without a tell-tale blush.
And notes complexions, with a sneer
And nothing to remark or pardon;
And now for the first time I’m bringing
And now she leaps and claps her heels.
And now the guests, exchanging glances.
And now they bring out eighteen jades.
And now what of Onegin? Truly
And now Zaretzky measures off
And nowhere is a spot of ink.
And nurses scream and children roar.
And of repeating platitudes,
And on the last page this reflection:
And on the lovage dropped a tear.
And on their skates the merry boys
And once I gave my meager all
And one would find the children roaming
And out of an old-fashioned notion
And Olenka’s. Why say them nay?”
And of the glorious days of old,
And offer hospitality.
And on Caucasian cliffs how often.
And on her lips a careless smile.
And on her shoulder leans his head;
And one may find a mirror lying
And other cares, severe, distressing,
And pen; good night.” Her single taper
And people later, with a frown,
And pity took the place of anger.
And plait his humble footgear there.
And pleading first that by-and-by
And pleasant though it is to roam.
And plunged in sorry thought, more slowly
And ponder each move’s secret meaning.
And presses her soft hand — elation
And pride that ever looks askance.
And promised them each year again
And prompts something satirical;
And purr the while: Tatyana saw
And puts her little hand at length 
And quite as faithless as their feet.
And raise love’s value cleverly;
And raised his nose above the rest.
And raises fowls, while at his knee
And rash the question that she broaches:
And re-upholstered for the trip.
And resolute, she shipped the peasant
And rightly: for Onegin, sitting
And roam the sea’s expanse, unpent.
And roamed its gardens at my ease,
And round the loaded carriage crowded,
And some harsh judges found, forsooth,
And Strasbourg pies, imperishable;
And scrapes his chair along the floor;
And search my nonsense for some wit.
And seat the two friends hastily.
And seemed about to faint and fall;
And sees the gaping fiends of hell:
And send them, armed, from Led at dawn,
And sentimentally devoted
And sentinel to sentinel 
And served each course to them by rank.
And setting up a new regime;
And shall return to him, I vow,
And sharing leisure, thoughts, and food,
And she will learn my knowledge of
And she, not knowing men are heartless,
And shrewdly held his peace; in sport
And shun the heart that would be tender.
And silently recall the past?
And silhouetted by the beams,
And sings, off key. The song is greeted
And sinks from sight, soon to be crumbling. 
And sleep at last her boon conferred;
And sleighing, and, when light grew dimmer,
And slept beside her every night.
And smoothly glide on polished boards; 
And snoring, heavy Pustyakov 
And so for days poor Tanya broods.
And so from idle talk she flies.
And so God grant them health and cheer!
And so her quick imagination
And so he’ll rifle keener minds;
And so inflexible their virtue.
And so of course the girl decided
And so the bumptious guild denies him;
And so the guests would say good-bye.
And so the morrow passes, too —
And so they aged, like all things mortal,
And so was captured by the French —
And so without more words, departed;
And solitude — this was, in fine,
And sometimes in my heart I own
And sometimes neatly made retort.
And soon the east will be alight;
And soon their tongues begin to race.
And sooth, I fled these haughty belles 
And stares unseeing, in no hurry
And staring in dismayed surprise,
And started on his aimless cruising.
And steamed herself on Saturday —
And steps across; her Mood congeals;
And still our Eugene lies abed
And stop defenceless in the field.
And such a crowd, a perfect rabble . .
And sulked, and swore that he would trim
And swift to flee from fun and folly,
And treading toes, between the chairs 
And truffles, luxury of youth,
And Turkish pipes of amber rare,
And tears of reconciliation
And tedious planned holidays.
And tells her doll with anxious thought
And terror-stricken would await
And that between her teeth, to greet 
And that for many a long day.
And the cool yawns that come amain. 
And the fond fool would then pursue
And the long evenings black as ink.
And the opinion of the town . . .
And the polite world’s hurly-burly.
And the rare magic of the Muse
And the smooth waters, mirror-bright,
And then appeared a row of glasses.
And then at home all day he stays
And then once more till noon sleep sound.
And then sat silent for the nonce.
And then the wayward course of passion. 
And there he also wrote another
And there were those who said they knew
And there’s a witch with a goatee,
And they delight to see it flow.
And think of it! So timid is he,
And this routine was to his taste.
And those I do not greatly me;
And though he was an ardent rake,
And though the talk of my yotmg friend
And through the frosty window-pane
And throws this challenge in our teeth:
And thus reduce him to confusion;
And time would pass, and there would be
And to a humble cottage dashes:
And to his stand the cabby goes.
And to my lips the words came thronging;
And to put finis to their chatter;
And to the final pages turning.
And took his medal for a toy
And trusted her with house and pelf,
And tucked away, an almanac
And Tanya’s heart began to glow.
And the two friends for death competing, 
And the young city miss who’s facing
And then, with Olga, how he acted!
And there the weary ploughmen dally.
And turned a joyful face to greet him
And Tanya enters. Here her prince.
And the improvement will be splendid! 
And there she stayed, and wept, and wept.
And tunnels under water, too.
And Tanya found the journey bleak.
And that it cheated us again;
And the deep seas His praise rehearse
And the poor girl is roused betimes
And the same pom, and the same spouse, 
And the word’s new — should not be great.
And the world smiled upon her, pressing
And thin, but pretty, more or less;
”And this is my Tatyana.” 'Taney!
And thunderous, flock eagerly:
And trifles of importance to
And turns to what is hers no more:
And vainer labor there is none —
And virtue won its due reward.
And visit at the Christmas season,
And w^ept his father and his mother . . .
And w^ho could wield the poet’s pen. 
And wake the birds in beech and larch.
And walk him in the afternoon.
And was at Olga’s ere he knew it!
And watch her, languidly enchanted!
And watch life’s furrows briefly nourish
And watch the failing of his breath,
And wdth a heart for love designed,
And what a throat! And what a spirit! . . .
And what of my Onegin? Drowsing,
^'And what of Olga?” is her query:
And what the fashions were that fall.
And what the moon might signify.
And what was my amazement, finding
And when a star dropped down the sky
And when consoled by art — and fame,
And when the little girls collected
And when their wives talked, it was worse.
And when they entered, arm in arm,
And when we find our old devotion 
And when, at midnight, madcap Russians,
And when, besides, her heart was wrung:
And where he left a lasting trace.
And where indeed of her they’re prating.
And where one falls, another surges . . .
And where the faithful suitor hovers,
And where the youthful galaxy
And where two pines their shadows fling
And while a husband is respected
And while my wanton muse rejoices
And while the breakfast is preparing
And while the world in silence slept.
And while they all are in high feather,
And whispering, make quite a stir:
And whom shall we confide in, pray?
And whom we kiss as they expect,
And why? What am I striving for?
And will accustom us to grammar;
And window -sashes rattled loudly.
And with a somber splendor shone
And with good cheer and merry sally
And with love’s sw^eet confusion dizzy,
And with strange languor fill my blood!
And with the spark of a bon mot
And wore the funeral wTeath at last.
And wore — her last defences down —
And worn in comfort, far from town.
And yet her face was pale and clouded
And yet her trust he’d not belie,
And yet more pleasant, on the sly
And yet she found it no affliction —
And yet the auguries perplex her.
And yet win luster from my writing;
And yet, were morals not in question,
And you shall judge me as you may.
And you, bright phantoms round him thronging,
And you, can you remain the same?
And you, my dear, are doomed to perish;
And you, my reader, wise and witty.
And you, oh, youthful inspiration,
And you, skilled pupils of Levshin,
And young in youth; blessed is he 
And your remarkable collection
And, careless of the cold, is training
And, feeling they had done their best,
And, fortune’s darling, in his rhyming
And, if my novel is to thrive.
And, seated, eagerly is eyeing
And, there at home, for Russia sigh.
And, with no aim on which to fix,
Anew the garrulous fond lyre?
Angel or fiend, as you prefer.
Anisya surely won’t ignore them;
Announces it is dinner-time.
Another ! . . . No, I could have given
Another day without an aim;
Another day: he still is dumb;
Another demon seizing me,
Another landowner come newly
Another neighbor tapped his skull:
Another, at a god’s dictation.
Another’s amorous invention
Another’s grief is hers to rue,
Another’s joy her heart possesses. 
Another’s, and his memory 
Anticipating this distraction.
Apart, Tatyana can but linger
Aplomb, he lifts his eye-glass, stares
Approach!” How calm and cold their faces.
Are all but flowing; her heart flutters,
Are all your relatives quite w ell?
Are certain that it only means 
Are charming, friends, but I would put
Are cordial to the country cousins.
Are crammed with all that’s necessary:
Are dazzling, and rejoice our hearts.
Are far too pleasant to seem long.
Are found absurd or else offensive 
Are glad at last to take a rest:
Are guarding fur-coats faithfully;
Are here, with scissors straight and curved. 
Are just the same as what they were; 
Are quite forgot- The path is now 
Are quite perplexed by such as she:
Are settled: they are fast asleep;
Are turned by one cool glance to ice,
Are waltzing round the dancing-floor.
Are you a guardian angel to me?
As a fit sequel to the roast:
As a good comrade, one who shares 
As at a mighty funeral feast;
As custom bade; with charm and spell 
As did the bard — yet not aquiver
As did this author: chief of all 
As do the sins of years long fled 
As does proud Moscow, in its rights.
As erstwhile comes, to hum an air
As every spring the sapHngs show
As fancy in the lot would trace 
As grateful as a kiss, as simple
As he depicted their delights;
As he was followed by the blues.
As her good nurse w^ould have her do:
As hermits live who hope for heaven
As his repellent aid he proffers;
As in a nightmare each one aims
''As in the old days poets wrote them —
As infant slumbers, as the moon
As I am, too, a little rest:
As I fared onward gloomily,
As I her rustic charms survey.
(As I in jest so oft asserted)?
As Lensky’s life that knew no guile,
As many wiles as I could mention 
As men need air, they found kvass needful,
As my confession. Why say more?
As on a shaky bench he lays her.
As on another road I fare.
As one who fought forgotten wars
As one who through a fog is peering,
As rock and wave, or ice and flame.
As some time later to assert
As suddenly grew timorous,
As that of one beneath a spell.
As the dark coverts were denuded;
As the two foes, with even tread.
As though a chiQy hand were laid
As though he’s surely done with books.
As though she feared an inquisition
As though there were a tacit ban
As through the dust his horses fare.
As upon any other day.
(As was the case, upon my honor.
As well as write; and how he bowed!
As wild as they: forsook her songs 
As years went by, and readily
As you discover life’s allures,
As, sped like arrows from the bow.
Ashamed to own his every feature;
Aside all timid thoughts, forgetting 
Askance at fair, unwonted faces,
Asked what Onegin’s visit meant,
Asked who she was, set straight his wig,
Asleep j&rom boredom?” "Not at all.”
At any gathering or dance,
At bottom, and, too bored to think.
At cards with his inheritance!
At Carnival in savory cheer,
At Christmas, carols were their pleasure;
At dawn tomorrow, near the mill;
At dusk a sleigh’s the thing, and caMng:
At dusk the samovar is gleaming
At either end the two friends stand.
At everything she gazes on;
At Europe’s dainty handicraft,
At fifteen feet: his aim was good.
At first but wept and tore her hair.
At first disturbed me, in the end 
At first Eugene began to dream
At first Madame controlled the child;
At giddy feasts and wild discussions,
At heart, giving a single jot.
At home his pistols claimed attention;
At last for whom her heart is yearning 
At last he rouses, opens wide
At last she rose, and gently sighing
At last, by night, arrived the snow*
At least, if pity seemed to soften
At length our hollow-hearted hero
At mere epistolary prose.
At noisy gatherings and after.
At once he offered with a smirk
At once that guests might be expected.
At once the slanderer to defy.
At once, and bear the weapon -case.
At peace, it is my artless pleasure
At slaughter, with a heart of leather . . .
At table, ’neath the damask cover.
At that she could no longer hide
At the back porch in readiness,
At the commencement of my story
At the gay spectacle turned hollow. 
At the spinet, then swiftly quitting 
At thirty profitably wed.
At twenty to the fashion bred,
At Whitsun, when the populace
At whiles, upon their elbow's leaning,
AU jealous thoughts evaporated —
Aunt Pelageya still possesses
^AVell, how are the young ladies faring?
Avails to rouse him: he is gone.
Away with Olga, nothing loth;
Away, his profile may be seen ...”
Away, the good old sleigh, at last. 
Away, while the old sleigh was mended 
Awhile all conversation ceases;
Ay is risky, if delicious;
am their neighbor.” ”Come, resume
A ballroom tyrant, tightly laced,
A brazen fellow, starched and proud.
A country house he next may see —
A fairy tale that lasts the night,
A giddy fop, and cruel spleen
A letter heartfelt, artless, candid;
A living picture, or a jest.
A missive eloquent of passion.
A monogram he found too mazy,
A pleasant notoriety?
A second, and a third he sends,
A soldier’s, wins us friends at Court,
A talked-of novel, rather hazy,
A way for her; he’s happy if 
A youth, who on the snow seems dozing;
About her early indiscretion . . .
Accomplished in the end. Three cheers!
Admired — ^in sketching whom you blunted 
Afar: the serpent and the tree 
Affairs of state, and over there 
Affection^ s spark in you^ believing 
Again a book was his sole crony —
Alas, our poor Onegin’s smitten:
All hope is gone! He leaves, and curses
All is foreseen: when I confess
Ally or enemy, attend
Although my freedom did not please me.
An alien, roving unrestricted,
An ancient, with perfumed gray hair, 
An eiffort to converse with her.
Ancestral Eve, you find delightful 
And . . . could not. Now she spoke, inquiring
And ail would relish the report
And as he reads, both thought and feeling
And cruel traitresses who smile.
And dreams and musings far from gay.
And far too wretched to be meek
And Fontenelle, acute, eupeptic;
And for the simple churchyard, telling
And halts in sudden deep confusion;
'^And happiness, before it glided
And he had set her heart awhirl!
And he, reluctant to surrender,
And healthless look, his dumb remorse — 
And here too was [Prolasov], stunted
And his cheek pale, she does not see 
And if her soul was deeply stirred,
And if the sudden sight dismayed her.
And it is precious, being brief:
And I have learned how to be meek*
And in her soul was resurrected
And leave the forests gaunt and harsh.
And locked him in a corner where
And longing thus, be forced to meet you
And now, at spring’s bright invitation.
And now, since I’ve no more to tell,
And oh, they are a weary weight!
And old companions, dull and vicious;
And one fibne morning finds him flying
And one thing more put us asunder —
And prim young misses looking sage;
And rightly, but his pain was such
And Russians too he would peruse:
And rootless dreams that could not last,
And sadly, virginally sighing,
And she — she who for Tanya posed . . . 
And so all hail to you, nine Muses, etc.”
And suddenly he’s at the gate.
And talk that brighten’s friendship’s ways.
And the grave eyes that have undone me
And there a traveler from a distance,
And thought he met with no rebuff.
And turn the meadow to a marsh 
And with a cheerful eye to greet you ! —
And with enamored eyes to see
And with the malice time imposes.
And without foolish affectation.
And you, my fair ideal, too,
Another set of lines transpired 
Appeal, complaint, confession, sobbing 
Approached her pillow, she would raise 
Are lulled to sleep, and readily 
Aroused your pity then . . . You’re kneeling 
As Eugene stares his heart is chilled
As Eugene, by regrets distracted.
As fields are blest by storms of spring:
As he comes near; it’s no illusion:
As only passion can have wrought.
As perfect as an illustration —
As she says gently: ^^Rise; have done.
As she surveyed him . . . His dejected 
As, my Onegin, I drop you.
Ashore at last, and our endeavor 
At a soiree. '^God! to see her! . . .
At him . . . And if she was amazed,
At the sad turning of the years,
At this unlucky moment, we
At times she pays him no attention;
Away forever, was so near! . . . 
adding several stanzas to them.
advantageous to readers, nevertheless injures the 
• . . and there
artist. The author himself felt the justice of it, but he 
A balalaika gives me pleasure,
A barrier that is no more,
A cottage with two rowan trees,
A frontier shattered by the war
A gentle sandy slope will please,
A housewife seems a perfect treasure!
A land imagination hallows:
A Moslem in his paradise.
A merry tune that, all unwilling,
A pallid swarm, the patients pour:
A pattern spread; and soon what yearning 
A veritable poet, yonder.
8 A wicket-gate and broken fences,
About its magic healing fountains,
15 About, some idle and some busy,
Abruptly down the incline bounding,
Absorbed in bitter meditation
Ah, you are lovely, shores of Tauris,
2 Ahead, a royal eagle winging;
All hustle, bustle, tell great lies,
Alone along the sea-shore; then
Alone? What of the eye-glass, eh?
Always the same and always novel.
Amidst this dreary family,
Among the huts where Tartars dwell . . . 
Among those regions drearily.
And show commercial enterprise.
AND FROM THERE TO THE CAUCASUS:
And at the tavern-door the clack
And dream about his native land.
And drunken stamp of the trepak,
And gulp them down as they arrive,
And Kura’s and Ajragva’s banks
And my own man I want to be.
And praise Odessa’s gardens greatly.
And so, my home was then Odessa . . .
And strolling with the throng you’ll view
And then, refreshed after a dipping,
And there beside the rocky shallows
And thought, I do not doubt, of me.
And valleys, trees, and hamlets seemed 
And with my vanished spring, it seems,
And yet Odessa, our wet city,
Announce the coming of his bales.
Appears, his broom in hand, still blinking;
Are here cast off, or so the flighty 
Are in them, and the sparkle of 
Are roaring the recitative.
Armenian, Spaniard, Frenchman, Greek,
6 As first I saw you there before us
At dawn, by Cytherea’s light.
At least of some complaint arthritic?
At the casino cosily;
Ausonia’s happy sons are trilling 
Away already: without fail.
Ay, when, foaming gold, it hisses . . .
a liberal temper, the second having the reputation of 
1811, a year which was also marked by the appear-
advantage has been taken of a few emendations ap- 
affected by liberal-minded fashionables in the early 
ance of a comet.
arabia.
are full of lively imagination and extraordinary 
attached a note in which, after quoting some relevant 
African origin. His great-grandfather, Abram Petro- 
Anna’s reign, Annibal, who had incurred Biihren’s 
Annibal’s curious life is known only from stories pre- 
At the age of eighteen Annibal was sent by the
a rather plump young girl with whom Pushkin con- 
artist of the period.
authenticity, presiding over married love.
Albani, an Italian painter of the seventeenth century, 
a celebrated restaurant in the Paris of the period.
and reads as follows:
Afraid before the headsman’s axe.
And for his mind, his rank does duty.
And nightmares and hallucinations.
Are such a man would rather bleed
as against a fence. — Pushkin.
Archives of the Foreign Office.
above.
and as an eccentric beauty, A. F. Zakrevskaya, with 
and Tatyana.
arrived among the savage Tauri, who were in the 
A fop gone bald, toil’s arrant foe.
A monarch weak and also cunning,
All Russia . . .
All this was but the bored profession
Alone had eyes, and every speech 
And here the regicidal dagger 
And in these nobles he would see
And now the one-armed prince had beckoned
And slowly by a secret network
And urged along the outbreak’s course.
And who, then, came to our assistance
Appendix
At first these were but machinations
Bassoon and flute at once are heard.
Bat have one things when you were gone^
BARATYNSKY
Bare steppe is all you will behold;
Be patient, then, as with a brother:
Be quick! Drive on!” he bids the peasant;
Be sentenced by a crooked jury 
Be sure you have your grandson go.”
Bearing her jar o’er creaking snows;
Because he could make no bon mot.
Because he hated litigation
Because it’s long since I have sinned.
Because there are no words in Russian
Because there was not much to pay,
Because they lacked — hadn’t one heard? — 
Before a storm; I wanted, too,
Before her charge, whose eyes were full.
Beheld the bed where all must lie,
Behind the curtain’s funeral fold
Behold each generation flourish,
Beholding bareness everywhere.
Beloved ... or such was his conviction,
Below that other’s signature
Beneath her pillow, empty playthings;
Beneath it: d. v. Annette”;
Beneath my Afric’s sunny sky,
Beneath the Finnish sky, alone.
Beneath the prudent flag of peace.
Beneath their sky he plucked his lyre,
Beside my quiet lake, beset 
Beside the fire a table’s set.
Beside the stanza all unfinished
Beside the window; on the pane 
Betrayed — he took a welcome rest. 
Betrays my stomach, and although 
Between a rascal and a bore;
Between her hours of toil and leisure
Beyond, the plain, with hamlets dotted,
BE THOU SPARED THESE FEARFUL DREAMS,
Be fact, and can my spring be past 
Be ruled by what is small and mean?
Be she? It is . . . But no . . . And yet . . .
Be thou my staffs nor let me stray.
Be thrilled upon Elysian ways 
Bears the proud burden of her rank!
Because my husband’s decoration,
Because rash ardor and quick wit
Because society’s conventions,
Because the tune is so diverting,
Because your honor and your pride 
Because, between the lines before him. 
Been married long?” ^’Two years.” whom?”
Befits and pleases you and me?”
Before her door; he waits for her;
Before her now, without a doubt:
Before him, loud with seething trajfl&c,
Before it’s heard, is grave and quiet.
Before the altar, head cast down.
Before the threshing-floor, thick willows 
Before they halted at a gateway 
Before whom my bold lyre is muted,
Before, her bow was as serene.
Begged that her husband sniffer her
Begins to raise his pistol coolly.
Behind a hill the moon is hidden;
Behind a stump among the trees
Behind the mill they went straightway.
18 Behind the scenes, the assignation?
Behind the strange bed’s silken curtain
Behold the Russian tents in ranks.
Behold! from town arrives — what rapture!
Beholding Lensky. ^^Well?” Forthrightly
Belong to youth, with youth are fled.
Below you see the river wind
Below, though it is early yet,
Beneath her pillow. Darkness keeps 
Beneath his fingers would have hurled 
Beneath the light of stars and lamps.
Beneath the shade of his acacias
Beshtau, the sharp-peaked, the eternal
Beside a stream, or on a hill.
Beside his heavy mate is lying.
Beside his wife, that chubby charmer.
Beside that most superb of creatures,
Beside that stream with shadows laced
Beside the fire and hum to it 
Beside the window. So life passes . . .
Best leeches send him to the spas.
Betrayed no anger, no surprise 
Between two aunts, beside a post,
Bewildering the wretched man.
Beyond the grave, yes, at the end 
Beyond, the Caucasus’ tall masses,
Birch, linden, aspen, all are bare;
Black chasm were gaping at her feet . . . 
Blase, growm tired of empty leisure.
Bleak tete-a-t^te concludes; he cheers 
Blessed is he who could be merry
Blessed is he who leaves the glory 
Blessed the new master every day.
Bloomed like a flower in the shade;
Bore to the grave to sleep forever 
Born of a liar in an attic.
Both carriages and people flounder.
Both friends and foes (they’re ail the same).
Both love and malice scarce recalling, 
Both tongue and seal are pink, are dry.
Bottles of cellar-cooled light wine:
Bowed lower, sought to catch her eye;
Breathes through the words she is inditing.
Brief as your footprints on the grass.
Briefly surveying every tier.
Bucolic piece! Good Lord, have pity!
Built by the fishermen was flaring.
Bumps down Tverskaya Street already.
But all too soon the summer ends.
But are those stirrups he is hearing?
But as for me . . . my loving praise
But as the rural dusk advances
But at eighteen that is the rule;
But at her window, fain to weep.
But at the late and sterile season,
But bears refreshment and renewal —
But brings to mind our fading years 
But business holds the greater part.
But by rule only, and he doted
But by some influence despotic.
But by the window she would brood
But by your will; my fate* s decided;
But curious, as maidens are,
But dinner’s served, and arm in arm
But drops it without more ado.
But even then, and more’s the pity,
But Eugene, now his friend was gone, 
But ere ’tis open, fades and crumbles.”
But ever sadder, ever fonder.
But Eugene’s sole preoccupation
But fast or slow, leave town behind!
But fiery youth cannot dissemble
But find the North is not my style.
But first he answers: ’’Agafon.”
But first, what dark delight you cherish, 
”But for a season it will do;
But for my part I do not mind
But for my wretched fate preserving
But for one thing he had a bent,
But for that sermon do not think
But from the ones we love and trust,
But have a warm, frank welcome for you.
But he refuses; he’s preparing
But he will back you while you live,
But heedlessly; she cannot school
But her good husband loved her dearly,
But her soul aches, and nothing pleases.
But here is tea: the girls demurely
But here’s our lady unattended.
But his grave illness, I confess,
But hush! Our sternest critic rises
But in their praises why be stringing
But I salute hope’s shy intrusion,
"But it’s a bore, my firiend, that’s clear.”
But I grow old, and memory fails;
But in my youth no one engaged 
But I foresee a fresh objection.
But in parenthesis I mention:
But I, my friend, am not contending
But I’m a dunce! They bade me say
But in a corner who is standing,
But it is late, he should be leaving;
But it was not capitulation
But I became another’s wife;
But journeys made in wintry weather
But just to tease your appetite;
But keep to their familiar ways:
But knew the most amusing stories
But left alone, Onegin sighed.
But left him bored to a degree,
But let us rather now inquire
But like a shadow moves about,
But listens with an absent smile.
But lo! from out the morning valley
But love grew greater, unreqmted;
But naught avails her girlish wrath;
But never mind the turn you gave me;
But never mind, let’s rather hurry
But no! the whole thing came to naught.”
But no! — straight down the steps to meet him
But no, our paths have separated.
But none as yet came near divining
But nothing hurts when you are playing;
But nothing offers consolation.
But now . . . the tombstone and its story
But now a kind and simple father,
But now adieu, oh, golden playtime!
But now all minds are fogged and cloudy,
But now her reason and her will 
But now it’s time for the ballet.
But now I am fed up with it;
But now the blue of evening darkens.
But now the heavy hammer’s pounding
But now, enough, have done; for you
But now, the prey of evil passion,
But now, ’tis as a house forsaken.
But oh, how deeply we must rue it.
But other fancies, dark and chill.
But our Onegin’s heart was stricken
But our Onegin’s out of range
But reasonable conversation.
”But ruin at his hands is sweet,”
But scarce did consciousness forsake him
But seeing Olga wouldn’t read ’em.
But she had heard of them a dozen
But she in whom my thoughts are rooted.
But she prepared a conflagration.
But she took fright, our shy Tatyana;
But she was slow of wit at best.
But silent as a sage he sat
But somehow his mere look averred
But soon was yawning while he raced:
But spend three hours before the glass,
But stepping forth she slips and tumbles;
But still she pants, her terror growing.
But the discussions I have heard, 
But then he paused, and with his narrow
But then, it puts me to the test.
But there’s no need that I dissemble
But Tasso’s murmured octaves are,
''But tell me, which one is Tatyana?”
But tenderness his look did show.
But that is not my pleasure now.
But that the wedding was deferred
But the provincial town affords 
But the sad ruin brought no sigh
But then he never read a page.
But there’s no rule that has not any:
But they demand a madrigal!
But this bright sibilant potation
But though the arguments are keen,
But to the garden let us race
But Tanya does not share our pleasure.
But Tanya had no tears at all;
But Tanya, dreaming, hardly hears,
But Tanya’s mother, not ignoring
"But tell me who she is.” "My wife.”
But the proud princess, cold and serious,
But this gay circle I deserted.
But those good friends who were insistent
But though Onegin’s peace forsake him
But tiresome ghosts. Can we unmask him? 
But to endure I need one boon —
But was true joy to Eugene granted 
But what availed her urgent passion?
But what w^as further to transpire 
But when he comes they notify him
But where is my disjointed story?
But where Melpomene’s bold gesture
But where no more one meets his face . . .
But whither in such anxious haste
But who does that is only choosing
But wishes them away with speed.
But with a new interpretation,
But with the living truth aglow,
But worldly quarrels breed the dread
But worse, what now you choose to do!
But wretched is the man who never
But years went rolling by, and then
But yet the pleasure’s dulled if he
But yielding to a dream’s distraction,
"But you were married, nurse,” said Tanya,
But you, Bordeaux, I always treasure
But you, chance volumes that in Hades
But you’re already dressed! God save me.
But, every interruption spurning,
But, feeling the blind archer’s sting,
But, God, such boredom who would sample? —
But, gentlemen, you may decline
But, heavens, what am I to do
But, Lord, before the evening’s ended 
But, lacking them, the joy’s diminished;
But, like a man of worth and sense,
But, Muse, you must forget the past.
”But, nurse, you still can tell me of
But, rain or shine, each day his coach is
Buyanov leads off Pustyakova;
Buyanov’s hand she has refused,
By a dark hope of what might be.
By a most happy whim. Lord Byron
By a slim icicle united.
By a sly dodge or ready jape.
By a translated move or word,
By afternoon he will be waking.
By an assumed austerity;
By any wife who’s virtuous.
By candle-light she rose and dressed.
By chance, these verses have not perished;
By dinner, tea, and supper merely.
By dreams of a far country shaken.
By facile conquest swiftly tired.
By Fate’s imperious decree.
By grove and stream and field and steep — 
By God! I wish I could retract.
By grandmammas and grandpapas.
By hate and dread, and strongly beat 
By her dull partner’s mood infected;
By honor’s dictates, was indeed 
By longing. I am ill, I fear:
By Lensky and his love; light flashes;
By mocking glance or chilly word,
By new desires I am enchanted.
By night, in dalliance, sweeter far.
By nothing stirred, where all is dim.
By poetry and love, or sickened 
By solitude nowise dejected;
By some obscure presentiment.
By someone awkward and afraid.
By sullen time, and soon grow wry 
By the Neva it may be you
By the still stream, with dusk descending.
By the young Olga’s winning ways,
By this delightful counsel guided,
By this most black and vengeful mood? 
By tiresome rhymes and vain regret,
By what Tolstoy’s fine brush created.
By words and looks insidious
By worldly approbation paid.
By your good friend, all without guile,
BYRON
By ladies in society . . .
By mental effort tranquilizing
By now the wine of poesy
By one emotion only stirred;
By one persistent thought he’s haunted.
By thaw and grimy steps defaced.
By those whose parts are not extensive?
By too-sweet tea, the ladies’ meekness, 
By what is his cold torpid soul
based on Pushkin’s poem, ’^The Caucasian Prisoner.”
behind their backs, while he alone was free, swimming 
but Peter I did not agree to return his godson. Till a 
but subtle praise of our fair compatriots. Thus Boileau, 
by the editor, to assist the foreign reader.
Bakhchi-Sarai.”
by Zhukovsky, an older friend of Pushkin’s.
Baroness Barbara von Kriidener; St. Preux and Wol- 
ballad of that title.
by Prince Vyazemsky. — Pushkin.
Bared silently, as in a dream.
Benedetta sia la madre: a Venetian baracarolle.
Between Lafitte and Veuve Cliquot, 
By rest, a novel torment, punished . . .
Caressingly repaid your song?
Catch the first stirrings of the heart.
Chapter One
Chapter Two
Cold ashes hide no smoldering ember;
Commands your tender minstrelsy?
Could alter Lensky’s virgin soul 
Could not conceive how pompous Grimm
Could not wash down with Veuve Cliquot
Could scarce inspire young Lensky’s zest.
Crossing the ballroom’s polished floor.
cxviii
Calash^ kibitka, crowded sleigh.
Call it magnetic or hypnotic.
Can a man do? Go walking there?
Can be surprised, who is not stirred 
Can it be Eugene? Truly? . . . Aye!
Can it be she who only now
Can it be that Tatyana truly
''Can it, indeed,” thinks Eugene, ''can it
Can only curse his wedding-day!
Can shovel silver with a spade;
Can the sad thought with which I flirted
Can this be she who long since wrote —
Can you, so generous, so keen.
Cannot eclipse her neighbor’s quite.
Careless of others’ joy and pain.
Caressed the tomb o’er which it swung.
Caricaturing every guest.
Carry this letter secretly
Caught fast, she cannot get away.
Ceased, like all else, to be amusing.
Chamfort and Herder and Manzoni,
Chapter Eight
Chapter Five
Chapter Four
Chapter I
Chapter Seven
Chapter Six
Chapter Three
Cherries and red raspberries.
Close as a marmot would require —
Come away, girls, come away!
Come here, my dear. Why, this seems all
Come home again, young Lensky duly
'^Come now, my child, it’s time: get up.
Come seek the stream that slowly goes 
Come to eternal rest, lies here.”
Come warm yourself where it is cozy;” 
Come, it is time to dine once more.
Come, rouse anew imagination —
Comes up to carry Olga off.
Commemorating one who’s gone;
Compelled young boughs, in sultry heat,
Complaint will make my pain no less.
Confide to it the wish she cherished.
Confound the senses suddenly.
Congratulations! Now we are 
Consoled the lady quite completely.
Consumed with terror, Tanya, quaking,
Consumption yet may overtake him.
Content in my old age to follow
Content, since habit, more or less,
Converse at ease, seem to rejoice.
Coquette believes; the old man dreams 
’’Correct; you’ll bring for our inspection 
Could drain each morning bottles three.
Could hoodwink the inteUigent;
Could Russia pardon my defection
Could scarcely count them, should I try.”
Could she but have foreseen the meeting 
Could show him an approximation 
Crowding, the trees about it grow,
Custodian of the desert, fills
Cut off before his hopes could bloom;
charm. One of our romantic writers found much more 
combine enlightenment with amiability, and strict 
Catherine’s reign at the age of ninety-two.
Czar to France, where he began his service in the 
complete biography of him. Footnote.)
Chapter II
carried with it a suggestion of subversive tendencies.
Chapter III
century poet who aimed to amuse.
Chapter I.
Chapter IV
Chapter V
Chapter VI
Chapter VII
Consequently, either I have the girth of a fifteen- 
Cottin.
courier, he drove so fast that his sword, sticking out 
Chapter VIII
called fountain of tears, in the palace of the Khan of 
century French author, known for his aphorisms.
course, his great-grandfather Hannibal, the alleged 
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
code, is told in the Introduction.
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
. . . cell joined to cell . . .
Dared clean his nails in front of him —
Dark Melmoth fills her wuth delight;
Darkly it rushes on amain,
Dawn’s air is sweet, she does not feel it.
Daylong, nightlong, thus to be bid 
Dear friend, before this heart is nmnb —
”Dear me, the years have just flown by!”
Dear Olga is his only matter.
Dear reader, pardon the betrayal;
Dear reader, what you are about-
"Dear, you are ill,” the old nurse muttered.
Deceit and gossip, rings and tears,
Deceit exists, but clings with tender 
Decipher epigraphs at sight.
Decked out as for a holocaust . . .
Deep drifted in the snowy hush.
Deep in the dust that time has laid.
Deep tenderness; perhaps he meant it.
Deep truths, or well-drawn scenes — yet not
Deferring to my wealth and rank.
Delight is mingled with distress
Described the town; we must admit.
Described with frenzied inspiration
Describes in pensive tracery 
Designed for you so sad a lot!
Desires that are too keen to slake.
Detractors, cowardly and vile,
Devoured Stendhal, the arrant skeptic.
Diana’s breast, the face of Flora,
Didelot enjoyed his victories
Dirk, door, eclipse, fir, ghost, ice, knave, 
Disdain sits silent in his eye; 
Dispatched his friend, and had his pleasure,
Displays her languor and her pride 
Displays to the indifferent crowed 
Disputing your small legacy.
Disturbed by ghosts of days gone by;
Diviners and Chaldean sages.
Djc !|e
' ’Dmitry Larin, a poor sinner,
DMITRIYEV
Do I thus give you an excuse?
Do me this favor, nurse, I pray.”
Do not be cross because I fail
Do not spy upon our games.
Does Eugene drive? Yes, I suspected
Donning Ms wide-br imm ed Bolivar,
Don’t aim to cover it with glory:
”Don’t think . . . but really . . . don’t accuse me . . .
Down to the waterfront there stumbles
Downhill she_trudges, scarcely breathing.
Drenched, deluged, choked with viscous mud;
Dressed early, shadow-pale, and sighing,
Drinks wine from tumblers,” it was hissed;
Drives home to take his night’s repose,
Drives home; and so at last to bed:
Drunk as an owl, into a trench.
Dub you a rogue, which is unfair.
During a drunken conversation
dora, Thekla, are used only by the common people.
Delphine: the leading character in a novel of the same 
duced one hundred and fifty sentimental novels.
Dufresny, 1654-1724.
dispatched by Prince Potemkin to the Empress as a 
ducted a flirtation when he was confined to the family 
Debates and friendly conversations;
Decembrists. The saying has not been found in the 
Drew up his regiments in line.
E sempre bene, gentlemen.
Each detail of our friend’s attire.
Each hour of torment added fuel
Each long and narrow as your waist,
Each man must do as he prefers —
Each morning by the Moscow chimes,
Each morning I awake proposing
Each room he finds unoccupied.
Each rural mother hopes to capture.
Each smile of yours, each glance, each motion;
Each to the other slyly winking,
Each whispers from behind her hand:
Each with a weapon in his hand.
Eavesdroppers, be off, auxiyl
Egypt’s retired corsair too.
Eh, friend?” But no, attend again:
Eight times changed places since they started; 
ELLE ETOIT FILLE, ELLE ETOIT AMOUREUSE.
Eliminated belle Nina,
Emboldened by his Olga’s smile,
Emotion is for clowns and fools.
Enchanted her while yet a child,
Enchanting, sparkling, frivolous.
Enjoy staid domesticity,
Enlightenment makes such as we 
Enlightenment may be belated
Ennui pervading the haul monde.
Enough to kill a reputation.
Enough! My soul is calm and quiet
Enough, sing other tunes, move on!” 
Enough. Though late, I’ve done my duty,
Enough. ’Tis time that I presented
Entreaties, vows, and foolish fears.
Ere yet the crystal with precision
Esteemed emotion, feeling none.
Etcetera. The glosses vex her.
Eugene
Eugene alone goes home to sleep.
Eugene alone was framed to measmre
Eugene berates them, rolls his eyes.
Eugene flings wide the door: defenseless.
Eugene had long abominated
Eugene himself with eyes that burned
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin : Chapter One
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Tivo
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene perused the sad epistle;
Eugene should not have been so rash.
Eugene was apt at keeping still;
Eugene was not alone in noting
Eugene, as he his turn awaited.
Eugene, more tolerant than many.
EUGENE ONEGIN GOES
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Europe has spurious wines to offer;
Even a man of honor: thus
Even by accident is heard 
Even Didelot becomes a bore.”
Even the pistol and the sword.
Examine Tanya silently
Except the stomach; I may mention 
Exceptions may be hard to find,
Excerpts
Exhibiting the present age,
Expressing the discrimination,
Extolling you in tones of fire!
edition, prepared for the press by the author in 1833; 
Eugene Onegin: Notes
eighteenth-century playwrights, the first a satirist of 
enlightened Europe, nails are cleaned with a special 
every capital so as to show the Europeans "un russe 
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
et plus on est sur de VavoirJ*^
Eugene Onegin: Notes
estate at Mikhailovskoe. In a letter to his brother he 
Eugene Onegin: Notes
ently and was followed in the manuscript by a de- 
eries and pranks,” together with some excerpts from 
Early editors substituted this name for the asterisks 
Education; he was a stickler for purity in language. 
Eugene Onegin: Notes
ence is to Thomas Raikes, an Englishman who met 
Egyptian pirate, but he was more probably a Moorish 
Ethiopian.
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Excerpts from Onegin's Travels
Fair ladies who are sentimental —
Familiar hills, familiar alleys.
Far back to a lost spring, and we.
Farewell! Forever, or for years?”
Farewell, proud palace! But why wait?
’’Farewell, the days of peace are past; 
"Farewell, you dear and peaceful valleys,
Farewell, you friendly skies of home;
Fat merchants, Cossacks, boulevards,
Fate guarded Eugene, our young waster;
Fate had arranged it otherwise.
Fate plans a different conclusion . . .
FARE THEE WELL, AND IF FOR EVER
Fair Nina Voronskaya, who
Fear of censorship seems to have been a minor factor; 
Fed by his slipper or review.
Feeling and thought with music’s strain.
Fell at her feet, his heart contracted;
Fie finds suflScient occupation
Find life a function to endure.
Finding my youthful dream come true —
Fine ladies, military fops.
Fine tales about your fair young Finn.
First at the desk, with lamp unlighted.
First Eugene, still advancing duly.
First glory, and then wealth and rank.
First let us prick his vanity
First snow, and delicately wrote 
First, memory would trace the features,
First: he accused himself of mocking
Five centuries are all we need 
Flames up, the embers glow again 
Fling him currants ripe and red.
Flings wide the door; his caftan’s torn,
Flows down in muddy streams and steady
Fluff in his hair, with visored cap
Fluff up her hair as style commands.
Fly, my darlings, run away.
Foot it neatly on the green!
For (as I’ve said) there he must sit 
For 1808 without a binding:
For a few books, a wilderness
For a long time . . . indeed, forever.
For all her future social cares 
For all that musty rhetoric.
For all the efforts she is making.
For all their views and passions not,
For all through Russia there will run 
For all your great gifts and your least, 
For army service; kept the books;
For as it is, my style is peppered
For carefree youth knows no regret.
For dreams, and would have been a shame.
For Eugene to behold him there 
For epigrams it would be splendid . . .
For epigrams, and was annoyed 
For four long years she had been ailing.
For friendship’s sake would I were writing
For gossip is not held a crime.
For God knows whom inspired your soul, 
For glory will be hers, and treasure!”
For happiness. Good God! I see
For he is welcome everywhere.
For here, Napoleon, elated
For honor could require no less.
For if they sing, they can’t be eating
For it is late, the shortest way;
For just those little slips of grammar;
For lady never, no, not one.
For learning takes an utter fool.
For Lensky, the cotillion seemed 
For marriage bond or marriage bell;
For me? Shall I yet see you winging 
For Olga’s album — not a bit!
For Petersburg’s no sleepyhead.
For ravings that it may induce.
For rustic freedom thus delights,
For six weeks yearly be a mess, a 
For such a life, I am afiraid.
For such mere trifles? Why repine 
For the corvee he substituted
For the cotillion begs her hand.
For the first time in any novel
For the good-byes; the turn-out waits. 
For the most costly merchandise 
For the wild steppes’ barbaric tongues,
For there’s a lack of taste in us.
For this new hero prithee feel a
For though the country boasts no palace,
For thus he brings his passion’s fuel
For trousers^ dress-coat^ and for vest;
For whom, Tatyana, is it meant?
For woman is a tender fool,
For worldly shows and vanities.
For, sad to say, she loved another:
Forbidden fruits alone entice —
Forced me to tear my heart away;
Forget the feelings that held riot
Forgetting friends and city ways
Forgive me, then, for thus retreating. 
"Forgive me. Prince, but can you not
Forgive me: Tanya, from the start,
Forgive the tears you wring from me,
Forgotten bridges rot and sink;
Forth rushes greedy youth to capture 
Forward, with groan and grunt he lunges,
Found a white picture to surprise her:
Found nothing fit to fill his life.
Four steps toward a narrow bed.
Framed somberly by gentlemen.
Free from digressions Chapter Five.
Freely the poet spoke and truly,
French dishes for the gourmet’s tooth.
French turns will please me in a sentence
Fresh grief would cause a keener smart —
Friends, for the poet you are grieving,
From a moth-eaten almanac;
From all the heart holds dear, my blunder
From distant streets where cabs were flying, 
From early youth his dedication
From Eugene: he was far too jaded —
From head to foot, in form or face.
From here he watched with thoughtful eyes
From his affection; they were these:
From hour to hour yet more enraptured
From misty Germany, Vladimir 
From Northern snows: you loved to tread 
From nearby hills the snow, already
From our good friends, may Heaven save us!
From porch to court, and shadow-light 
From speech: you never would have learned
From that dull hole . . And his lorgnette
From the drawn bow the arrow leaping
From the hussar, Pykhtin, who used
From their twin lanterns as they go.
From these the man might be inferred.
From thoughts of him she is not firee;
From two to thirty, in a row;
Frost glistens. Mother Winter’s arts
Fruit of spoiled years, or green and tart,
FROM
FROM MOSCOW TO NIZHNI -NOVGOROD:
French writer.
From Istamboul may not be here.
From shipboard looming on the sight
From shipboard, thunder dawn, than I, 
Full soon my errant Muse was proving
figure in the early editions.
from a famous watch-maker of the period.
French choreographer established in Russia.
father’s luxurious life, his nineteen brothers — he was 
from the early editions; the Russian Beau Brummel; 
From then on he never left the Emperor’s side. In 
friend, Miinnich. Miinnich was amazed and advised 
First Spain was rocked by storm, and, second.
For him one moral had to teach;
For the United Slavs recruited.
French prelate who was Napoleon’s chaplain; his 
From hesitancy strove to wean us.
From Kishinev to friends of Greece.
From other fires that had been hidden
Games kindred in monotony.
Gave up his dreams as wild and silly:
Gay carriages, a goodly number,
''Get up,” he cried, "Past six, I vow,
Girls, strike up a melody.
Give way in turn to common sense:
Given to mournful reverie.”
Glass after glass is drained in drenching
Gleam white; the sleigh, more swift than steady. 
Glimpse of Terpsichore’s sweet foot. 
Glimpsing behind the distant bushes 
Go with the solemn folk who bore you.
^"Go, leave me, nurse,” Tatyana said,
God grant it’s nothing! Welladay!
God grant you find some trifle here
”God knows how gladly, only say it . . .”
God’s servant, and a brigadier,
Goes out at once, demands a horse.
Goethe and Schiller were his masters.
Gold pines, and live Limburger cheese.
Gone with the styles we do not use,
Good neighbor who’s dropped in on me,
Good readers: a new face arrives.
"Good-bye, Onegin, I must go.”
Graved on the monument you see:
Gravely departed priest and guest.
Great ladies, far too proud to fall,
Great ladies, of whom he’d been fond; 
Green tables are set up, alluring
Grieves for the wretch throughout her life,
Grow fond — out of sheer idleness.
GRIBOYEDOV
Gray skies, and heaps of straw in billows
Grew worldly-wise as life grew chilly,
Guests bow and scrape within the door.
Guillot is standing, ill at ease.
Gulnare’s bold singer emulating,
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov,
generation that preceded Pushkin’s. Katenin, a friend 
gift to Peter the Great, who had him baptized at 
good living and high thinking. The name does not 
Great by Shirinsky-Shikhmatov and Gruzintzev.
Greek names, as, for example, Agathon, Philat, Theo- 
Gustave de Linar: a character in Valerie, a novel by 
gratulations of the venerable poet, Derzhavin, who 
group of young highbrows who served in the Moscow 
God helped; complaints did not embarrass
Griboyedov’s famous comedy, Woe From Wit.
Had been refurbished, yawn he must.
Had brought the fruits of learning’s tree: 
Had Eugene, from a little bird.
Half-grave, half-gay, and with a flavor 
He can no longer be enchanted,
He caught the post with eager haste,
He comes: a cork pops, up it goes.
He could forget himself completely.
He did stop short of suicide.
He dined, he danced, he fenced, he rode.
He early knew the agitation
He early played the fond deceiver.
He first abandoned you, capricious
He fled their noisy conversation
He found it puzzling but alluring;
He found the fairest faces null;
He found the matter not too clear.
He had no itch to dig for glories
He had some other expectation?
He held that loyal friends and steady
He held that some by Fate were chosen
He hows to sundry friends; his mocking
He is the victim of remorse.
He joins the throng on the boulevard^
He knew one torment, one delight
He knew the ruses that would brighten
He knew the task would sorely try him
He leaves the ladies’ hands unkissed;
He let the classic laurel fade,
He listened to young Lensky, smiling:
’’He never puts a civil face on.
He noted with accustomed malice.
He offers all a grand example;
He paid the Muses honor due;
He racked his brains, and still believed
He sang life’s bloom and early blight:
He sang of parting and repining;
He sang the rose, romantic flower;
He scorned most men (not every one).
He set the ladies’ eyes aglow.
He sighed, no longer subject to them:
He sighs: ^'They’re past the age — it’s shocking! 
He soon consigns them to perdition. 
He spared the rod to spoil the boy,
He spared us, true, one piece of folly;
He talked about the wealth of nations;
He thought it no great loss — perchance
He thought: I must not disconcert him
He was none of your poetasters,
He who could never understand
He will lie late, and on Ms tray 
He would implore the shy confession.
He yawns, for serious labor tries him.
Here is a ball, and there a party;
Here not a wit was found to shine
Here one heard naught but echoes, dying,
Here was Onegin, then, possessing
Here’s bronze and china in profusion.
Here’s every dainty that you please:
He’d catch the moment of emotion.
He’d stroll into the drawing-room 
He’ll then resume till day is breaking
He’s done with women, and it looks 
He’s driven from the ball to bed:
He’s read and read, and pray, what for?
Hi Too ill for hopes of getting better,
Himself, his dinner, and his wife.
His appetite for pleasure’s hearty —
His debt to nature has been paid.
His door he locks, his lamp he trims.
His doubts were never past the curing,
His early years were all a waste.
His eyes, how tender, quick and clear.
His father listened, frowned, and groaned.
His friend [Kaverin] must be waiting.
His hair cut in the latest mode;
His heart the nest of fond illusion,
His housekeeper for forty years,
His illness — ^name it how you choose,
His knowledge of the tongue was slight:
His music therewith sweetly c h im i ng;
His nineteenth year was scarce in sight.
His oars above the drowsy stream;
His page is empty as can be.
His principal accomplishment;
His sentiments were fine and true.
His sharp intelligence and chilly,
His spirit knew their lyric jSre.
His stables, forests, streams and land.
His uncle’s in his cofl&n laid:
His way of dreaming, willy-nilly.
His were the dreams that move the heart
Hold your lorgnette up, watch them nearly.
How much of life I spent in vain.
How once I held her stirrup for her,
HORACE
Hope of a name none might forget.
Husbands esteemed, to you I tender —
^ hen we seek refuge, growing colder.
Had her shy wistful heart been burning; 
Had made the choice, ’twas not her own;
Has clothed a hopeless egoism 
Has sent you, and I shall be leaning 
Have learned how hearts can be tormented.
Have seen such ladies, not a few
He came. And her eyes opened. Quaking,
He did not know that books could say things
He died a short hour before dinner.
He does not even guess my pain.
He hoped that in good time I’d marry
He knew one constant inspiration.
He lived in quite another age);
He loved as people love no longer
He loved the dark and shunned the daytime,
He thought the tomes his daughter kept
(He was a decent chap, conceding 
He was a veteran in love.
He watched her as she played and sang;
He wore a dressing-gown himself;
Held Richardson as dear as life.
Her chest heaves, and her cheeks are kindled 
Her dreams in every circumstance 
Her dreamy mood did not consort
Her eyes shine, and her breath has dwindled.
Her father saw no harm in reading
Her flaxen hair, her graceful poses.
Her grief into the garden taking,
Her heart was filled with one alone.
Her heart, and when she likes, 'withdraws, 
Her languor will not let her move.
Her love in Russian has confided;
Her nightgown slips from off her shoulder,
Her prudent husband, to distract her.
Her rosy innocence and grace.
Her sister tempts the Muse, not she.
Her sky-blue eyes, her cheeks like roses,
Her son! to distant regions fled,
Her soul was waiting . . . ah, for whom?
Her spouse had not a word to say.
Her tender fingers sewed no seam,
Her voice, were such as they portray
Here in this village unfrequented.
Here’s what you find there (am I right?) :
Herself to love and all its laws.
He’d led a kind and simple life;
Hi Dashed off; arrived; and heartily
His enemies were always base.
His epitaph is plain as he;
His friend unburdened himself of —
His heart was pure, his conscience clear;
His life, that knew no cares or labors,
His magic presence hovers round her;
His Olga. I can hear him say:
His passing came as a disaster
His soul by highest motives guided,
His virgin lyric was of her.
His was the love of poets, stronger 
His wedding was a settled matter.
Holding their pious habits dear;
Hoping her grief might thus abate;
How can I help you, only say!
How is it that you do not fall 
How sad it is to be forgetting!
How very welcome you will be.”
"How was it?” "By God’s will, my Vanya 
However, was no Grandison.
”0h, it is nothing, nurse, I know.
’^Has he forgotten us — what is it?
Her eyes betray her with a tear.
here! Eugene!'’ she panted;
Has held the first place in my heart.
Have dimmed the golden coal; half-seen,
Have passages on nature vying 
Having her album there to finger,
He dares to trifle with a tress
He decorates it earnestly:
He killed eight years thus like a dunce —
He let the summer season fly,
He lived — in summer rose at seven;
He loves you ... as a relative!
He offered her his arm. Despairing,
He passes over in a rush
He swam this Hellespont anew,
He waits: and up a troika prances,
He would not play the base deceiver.
He writes a verse for her to dote on —
Hear my confession, then, I pray.
Her anguished heart some peace w as granteti
Her looks, her words — he does not flatter.
Her melancholy eyes adore him —
Her virgin calm is of the past;
Her well-bound quarto to inscribe,
Her work the crackling matchwood lights,
Her worth, each year more sullen growing. 
Here you will find as decoration
Here’s Pradt and Scott. You do not think
’’He’s coming?” But in silence basking.
^^High time she w^ed!” But I am dragging 
His courting now was minus zest;
^^His days and dreams what man recovers?
His mood no gloomier, no gayer;
His roans bring Lensky to the door;
His soul’s innate nobility;
His verses like a river flow.
His worn shoe slipping on the ice,
Hither to our frolic and 
Hold on, old fellow, that will do . . .
Homeward, along the kitchen-garden;
How blessed the lover who is granted
How blessed, indeed . . . though she might choose
How many follies then were floating
Hymen prepares to strew our way,
H’m, h’m! dear reader, pray apprise me.
”0h, there will be a dreadful babble,
He said, and found his words the cue
His precious Olga: such is love!
^ hen but a fortnight more had fled
Had chased him and had quickly caught him.
Had gout at forty, fat and flabby;
Had he been quicker in revealing —
Had he but known the wounding sorrow
Had marked the place; and, more attentive, 
Had shown to my enchanted glance 
Has found a refuge from the blast 
"Has he grown tame at last, and mellow?
Has she the answer to the riddle
Has thrilled by night the silent dale.
Have acted with intelligence.
Have been away! Before you vanish 
Have been content to eat and drink,
Have given me prestige? Be frank!
Have paid to folly what’s her due.
Have passed since in a hazy vision 
Have played a prank in coquetry.
Have your own horses pull your coaches,
Having attained to twenty -six —
Having, to satisfy a whim.
He barely spoke; his urgent mission
He bowed to her without a word.
He calls for help, in misery;
He came, unripe, unto the tomb!
He cannot give me happiness.”
He comes upon her, as he enters.
He counts the slow hours, vainly trying
He curses women’s whim with force.
He did not die or go insane.
He did not stir, but like one dreaming
He did not value letters much.
He dined here. What fine gentlemen!
He does not cease his stubborn stare:
He does not heed the mind’s reproaches,
He drinks: with greedy howls they swill;
He dropped his eyes in irritation
He erred; for Eugene, hardy sinner.
He feared that he had not incited
He feels that it must break with grieving. 
He fell from off a Kalmuck stallion.
He finds that no remarks occur
He frowns, and everyone is still;
He gazes, and his heart is riven:
He gives his man the arms to carry
He goes in to the princess, quaking;
He Hked debate, and sometimes rudely
He has a single thought to ponder:
He has it still — a touching note,
He holds a stocking he was mending;
He is, though not renowned or quoted,
He knows dehght when he’s adjusting
He laughs, and they are all guffawing;
He lay most strangely there at rest.
He lays her down upon the sill.
He leads her, nonchalantly gliding.
He left his rustics to their tillage,
"He lives in Moscow. Last December
He looked the poet, when he’d let a
He looked them over, boxed them right,
He loved me, and the dawn of life
He marked the time, and presently
He marks the hour with some dismay:
He may pick up her handkerchief.
He might have altered and deserted
He might have gone to bed and died
He might have learned that life was shabby
He must be off without delay.
He never thought of the vexation 
He now repents him of the course
He offered solace and delight,
He often paid a call, surmising 
He pens, with trembling hand and weak,
He quits his place of hibernation —
He quits the rout, and, meditating.
He read at will: Gibbon, Rousseau,
He read miscellany and journal.
He rescued them, and with the knack
He savors the few words that settle
He seems to see his Olga there
He seems, indeed, an alien here,
He sees forgotten foes, malicious 
He set his mind to work with zest.
He thrust his nose in right away.
He took his coffee here, and rested,
He took, and fain would be forgiven;
He trembles, cannot say a word,
He waits with jealous indignation
He wakes to find a note — that’s pleasant:
He walks into the empty lobby.
He wanted to converse with her
He was convinced the fickle fair
He was in bliss. Indeed, thrice blessed 
He was no fool; and Eugene, ready
He was not one to pick and choose.
He waved his hand, as one who’d rue it
He well knew how to set you laughing.
Headlong into a world unknown.
Her billowy soft rugs are flung;
Her cheek rests on her hand, and she
Her countrified simplicity 
Her darkening eyes she never raises;
Her dear familiar room shows plain,
Her dove, her confidante devoted,
Her dowdy frocks, and to their mercies 
Her face would pale, her body quivered.
Her flowers, her romantic novels,
Her fondness for them never changing.
Her gauzy veil aside to see 
Her growing doubts they cannot still.
Her heart assailed, where’er she went 
Her in the princess readily!
Her look, so candid and serene.
Her lowered eyes agleam the while,
Her manner was what it had been
Her mind with agitation seething,
Her motion, in pure splendor dressed!
Her passion, not by chance or skill; 
Her rosy cheeks are not less bright
Her sad fatigue, her helpless languor.
Her small wet slipper’s next to go.
Her sweet simplicity of mien! . . .
Her tender voice is like a reed’s.
Her terror held a secret charm:
Her trailing skirt, with hand that quivers;
Her trinkets rudely from her tearing;
Her voiceless grief was past disguising;
Her walks are longer, she will dally
Her weakness, and she coughed and cried.
Here an ambassador was weighing 
Here at my feet. But dare you say 
Here comes Gvozdin, a first-rate farmer
Here dandies now in the ascendant
Here fashionables would repair.
Here in the world’s benumbing rapture, 
Here is a door — ^he flings it wide,
Here the patricians congregated.
Here was a man who had a weakness
”Here you will find the master’s den.
Here, bonneted and wearing roses,
Here, mornings, he would read his book . . . 
Here’s Petushkov, a rural beau;
Here’s the exordium. That’s that!
Here’s winter! . . . The triumphant peasant
Hers is a calm simplicity.
He’d had a glimpse of his estate;
He’d have disarmed the youthful heart.
He’d suffer bonds again, provided 
He’d suffered j&rom such things for years.
He’s in, and flying to the mill.
He’s killed! The fearful affirmation
He’s sent to doctors, the Neva’s
Hi Yet brighter shines the moon than any
High tragedy and swoons and tears,
Highways to make the country one.
Himself back to his regiment.
Himself so deep in it that he 
Himself transformed into a horse;
Himself, even in privacy.
His bride was soon content to be 
His course no more; but, oh, most dear,
His cup of tea with rum deserting,
His doubts: for meet they surely will 
His dressing-gown and slippers bringing,
His drowsy eyes, and draws aside 
His friend for thus misleading him;
His gentle touch nowise dismays her.
His hand upon his breast lays lightly.
His head above her fondly bent,
His heart is all but crushed with pain,
His heart is by such anguish bitten
His heart leaps up, his soul is stirred.
His heart with sore repentance filled.
His jealousy and his vexation
His madness — and again immerses 
His mare scents snow upon the pleasant
His mind was ever far away;
His mother stands and threatens him.
His nag has ribs that might be counted. 
His neighbor, calling out his name,
His news sets girlish hearts to drumming:
His pocket burns: it holds a treasure,
His slightest move is overawing;
His son was married recently.
His strain was languid, dark (romantic
His toast rings out the first of all,
His whims; 0 hover thou above 
Hope lies to them, and they’re beguiled.
Horns and a quilted dressing-gown;
HOW CAN ONE NOT LOVE MOSCOW, PRAY?
How changed Tatyana is! How truly
How heavenly, as she advances,
How jfirmly her attention centers
How justly now I am afflicted.
How many chapters Fate has closed! 
How many swiftly flitting days 
How noble was the tone he’d taken;
How oft on the dark shores of Tauris
How often, sick with separation,
How sad I find you! How you flood 
”How Tanya’s grown! Why, how long is it
However dazzling to the sight.
had resolved to omit this chapter for reasons impor- 
have been printed; we are reproducing them here, 
him to indicate the omitted chapter by dots or a 
Hard pavements, like a coat of mail.
Has been diluted heavily.
Have cards and dice; and not for naught 
Have there been any conflagrations?
Have they arrived? His calculations
He pours out fluent melodies;
He sees the self-willed Terek flinging
He turned a partial eye on it.
He yawns and starts to snore again.
Her husband, in the corner, dozing,
Her pet, Rossini, must be heard.
Here too the plainsman comes and brags,
He’d take his fascinating pen 
Hoping to sell his worthless nags;
How ardently this breast was burning! 
How dismal to be sturdy. Lord,
How dismal to be young, and bored!”
How dismal!
have said that Chaadayev should be exhibited in 
he may have wished thus to tease the reader’s imagi- 
head and the rank of lieutenant in the French army. 
heroine of Pushkin’s first narrative poem.
him to go into hiding immediately. Annibal retired to 
himself the youngest boy; he remembered how they 
his estates, where he lived throughout the remaining 
hovskoy was a prolific author of comedies; both men 
His son, Lieutenant General I. A. Annibal, was
heroines of two of Pushkin’s narrative poems: ''The 
Heloise; Clarissa: the heroine of Clarissa Harlotve; 
has a terrifying dream.
husband in the mirror, and to learn his name from the 
Harold.
He’s dignified, he dyes his hair.
habit of sacrificing strangers to Artemis, contended as 
He looked more crestfallen than regal
Here Lunin spoke impressively,
Here Pushkin read his verse with swagger.
His object was emancipation.
I moved there also for a while,
If true delight you would afford him
III He lived in debt, and did not bother
In French he could converse politely.
In praise of so much wit and charm.
In spite of all oinr efforts, too.
In such a brief and tragic fashion —
In the mazurka, ’twas allowed.
Is all they give us as a rule,
Is more than could have been expected:
It may be, in your glory flourished.
IV And melancholy minus reason.
[ix] In these lone steppes an exile’s home.
I call on freedom — ^naught avails:
I did not ache with such desire
I hardly read, I’m often dozing.
I have no care for flighty fame;
I have no tears, in spite of grief;
I hear the magic of your voice,
I like a life of country quiet;
I liked, and his peculiar pose;
I listened, not without elation.
I love fierce youth, my private passion
I loved, and nothing could relieve me. 
I pace the beach, await good weather.
I sadly call on each sweet name.
I too had dropped, and found him then — 
I trust that you will pardon me;
I was a dolt and could not sing.
I was embittered, he morose.
I write, and longing is diminished;
If out of date, the lofty ceiling.
If you have any mind to flirt, you
III Killed flies, and snugly rusticated.
Impatient, twitch beneath the lamp.
In cantos numbering twenty -five!
In dress a pedant and a fop.
In golden languor vaguely floating;
In Orient luxury once cherished.
In reverie they would dissolve;
In Say and Bentham for her chatter. 
In secret, of dear distant creatures.
In solitude without a flaw,
In this case it is not too strong
In this opinion all concur.
In time-worn halls and those that just
In turn Ms fickle flattery brings.
In vain the belles might clamor for him.
In worldly dazzle and confusion
Indeed, he soon received a letter
Indulge in lovers’ dreams with ease;
Instruct the fair without a word.
Into a more exacting book.
Is dashing in the cab he hired.
Is dressed, undressed, and dressed again?
Is now our hero’s, it appears.
Is the shrewd elegance of fashion,
Istomina on lifted toe.
It suits my Muse as it suits me.
It waited on, for him alone;
It was for you that I neglected
Its classic grace draws in its wake
Its pleasures, like the city’s, pall.
Iv There fancies bloom and dreams run riot —
Ivi With pleasure I have often noted
Ivii I too made it my occupation
Iviii To whom did your confessed devotion.
IV Of making certain grand concessions
I’d live through every ball again.
I’ll give the censorship its due.
I’m sad and cold, and yet it seems 
I’ve drawn a likeness perfectly:
I’ve haunted the ballet — what for?
I’ve scanned the pages most severely.
:ic
I . . . I’m in love,” she murmured low.
I am deceived by no illusion;
"I am in love,” poor Tanya uttered
"I am in love; leave me alone.”
I am not given to repentance —
I bow and cede my rights to you . . .
I burned, my pulses started drumming.
"I cannot grasp it. I’ll be betting
I cannot say; I’ve talked so long
I cannot suffer the discussion —
I find the plain home circle dear.
I first resolved upon refraining
I hate red lips that are unsmiling,
I have known women, stern and rigid.
I have no faith in its requiting
I have seen other belles who bent
I know that life is but a bubble,
I left you in a dreadful fright;
"I lived, by strangers quite surrounded.
I looked for peace in prayer, kneeling.
I lose the thread, my mind’s not clear.
I loved your image even then;
I marveled at their iron virtue,
I might (who knows?) have grown contented.
I might indeed make bold to borrow
I must be growing dull, I fear.
"I see no harm in that; I’m grateful.”
I see the pain has left no trace;
I shall defy the dread ApoUo,
I shall recall the tongue of longing.
"I shan’t detain you; but where is it
I share the scalding tears you drop:
I throw myself on your compassion . . .
I treasure it most piously;
I trembled at your glance, and when
I understood them not at all.
I vurite you, and my act is serving
I wait: when once your look has spoken.
I want to cry, to sob — oh, nursey!”
I would not leave the world, unknown.
If only you were with me still,
If there had been a hope remaining
If there w'as carping comment, too;
Imagine: here I am alone.
In all the novels of the day.
In colored silks a pattern fit 
In deep reflection, hot discussion.
In every nook, with strange emotion;
In fancying a happy tryst 
In full the tender story duly,
In gentle whispers with her nurse.
In gossip finds the spice of life,
In its seductive figments now!
In kerchief and long gown of wool.
In mischief, but horrific stories 
In Richardson as in Rousseau.
In Russian? And the task’s infernal. 
In saturnine romanticism.
In talk of love. It was thought shameless — 
In the thick grass where none can see,
In the unruj63ed heavens shining;
In those white hands would be distressing! 
In time I shall relate the rest.
In winter when the nights were wild.
In winter, when night’s shade encloses
Inscription written: ”Ye surrender 
^^Into my golden chamber^ comeV^
Into one image, her heart leaping 
Is bound up with the servants’ hall.
Is brought, and Dunya pours his tea;
Is Eugene! By another portal 
Is for the good old-fashioned ways.
Is in these parlous days unknown;
Is it because her love is artless.
Is it because she cannot deem
Is like a copy pale and vicious,
Is like Van Dyck’s Madonna. Fie!
Is surrogate for happiness.
Is the benign and silent moon;
It all pours forth from lips that tremble
It humbly asks romantic fame.
It is my letter, don’t you see.
It is no wonder I am fretting . .
It makes no difference to her.
It may be Lethe will not cover;
It was decreed ... the will of Heaven
Its love or anger, grief or joy;
Its reckless growth: into the grave 
IV And reader, you are not refusing
IX Discovers a new fascination
IX The stir of noble indignation,
I’d like to see with my own eyes
I’ll bring them to the altar then . . .
I’ll sprinkle you with holy water.
I’ll tell no ghostly tales, or gory.
I’m bored; tell me a story, dear.”
I’ve a suspicion, make me ill.
I’ve fallen on black days, my dear —
[i-vij A woman’s love for us increases
I am assailed by melancholy;
I boxed your ears! I gave you cakes!”
I can’t go out: I cannot walk —
I choke him with a tragedy;
I could not see it without gloating,
I court the Muse with indolence.
I fain would write a diatribe —
I fear, friends, lest your patience fail:
I found you good, and I attest 
I frighten the wild ducks by rolling
I He’d greet the hour so long awaited.
I have them here for you to see:
I know there’ll be a warm reception
I must admit the sorry truth,
"I must confess, though loth to hurt you,
I quote myself, and do it pat).
I read a shy, confiding word.
I read not to the crowd, but only
I reminisced of the attraction
I shall lose patience soon, of course:
I shall not suffer the deceiver
”I should most dearly like to see.”
I tasted all your joys with zest;
I thought to paint (see Chapter One)
I try to glimpse it; but I trust 
I The taw^dry glitter of her vesture.
I w-ould not praise you, but sincerely
I w-ould requite sincerity;
I was not bom for happiness;
I, too, recalling poor Svetlana,
If for a moment I found pleasure
If friends and kin are undeserving.
If he goes home, his dreams still linger
"If I were one of those w-ho rather
If not, my dear. I’ll see you through.”
If on the left she would espy
If she encountered, unaware,
Ignores what happened yesterday,
III As she reviews Onegin’s coming
III For verse — it would not be surprising,
III Mourn those that autumn doomed to perish.
Impulsiveness may lead to grief.”
In billiards, with a good blunt cue 
In catching Tanya’s eye, she took 
In chorus the old ladies cry:
In cosy comfort, sleeping sweetly.
In cosy scenes of fireside life.
In dizzy circles round and round, 
In dread of what this might forebode;
In elegiac mood, at last 
In endless reverie indulging,
In festive crowds, in solitude.
In flannels and a night-cap too.
In grave seclusion as is fit.
In hacked as well as hackneyed verse 
In her room w"hile the light is flitting;
In his first youth he w'as the prey
In ink or colors he is sketching
In judgment on himself could be 
In many guises she comes flying:
In nothing, but can never rest.
In Olga’s presence poor Vladimir
In our lime too, in days of old),
In our poetic reverie
In passing that my stanzas speak 
In praises of his hardihood;
In runs his valet, prompt Guillot,
In secret Tanya was repining;
In shouting fiercely: ^^Mine! She’s mine!”
In silence, hearing still the faint
In still and somber beauty stand
In such a year, at such an age;
In that same hamlet where of yore 
In the same carefree lively way 
In the smart sanctum, all a -quiver,
In the soft luxury of feeling,
In this affair our friend was tested
In this important sport the jaded
In time, my readers, you shall hear
In to her sister, swallow-light;
In token of our warm regard.
In town), with pots and pans and gear 
In tracking you! I should be moving 
In uniform . . . Now he is walking 
In vain a Moscow on her knees 
In vain into the darkness staring
In vain she struggles to escape;
In which, God help us, we are stuck.
In your imported carriage, pray
Inane and petty, while the ode
Increase the din of celebration;
Indoors, the maid will softly sing
Infer, then, with what thorny roses
Inflames the girl’s conceited face;
Inscribing albums of this kind:
Inserting: belle Tatiana.
Inspired by tender melancholy,
Instead of bristling at the start —
Into a meadow sweet with bloom.
Into the flooded meadowlands.
Into the pan the powder’s sifted,
Into the silent study, setting
Into the stream her red-webbed foot,
Into the woods, pursued, she presses;
Invite her, kiss her, press her hands.
Is alien to my breast, and brings
Is all abubble and agleam,
Is but a flirt. Though she is barely 
Is but the wistful moon’s, alas! . , «
Is but to lull dark thoughts to sleep.
Is forced to curtsey, to his bow.
Is gaily whirling overhead,
Is half a crane and half a cat.
Is he from Heaven or from Hades?
Is heedless of the friendly clapping;
Is honor’s mainspring. I’ll be bound —
Is hushed. Alone the angry chorus
Is it that I was born to languish.
Is just as deaf and just as meek.
Is launched into eternity.
Is lost to us, and he shall never 
Is slobbered over bit and traces.
Is snatched away from her by Fate
Is southern winter’s travesty;
Is this world shut for aye to him?
It all, in detail, never fear.
It happened that a peddler tendered
It is a phantom you are chasing,
It means the people to whose faces
It was he came to visit me.
It was his pleasure quietly
Its aim is high, its meaning mighty . .
Its passage, it has ceased to be.
Its splendor among ancient trees,
Its wings with crazy motions twirling;
Itself upon its memories.
It’s like a mistress, gay, capricious,
”It’s like a novel . . . life’s so chancey • . .”
It’s misery, and who can cure it?”
It’s over. Having supped, the gentry 
It’s plain that here he is the master.
IV And you who bask in fortune’s favor.
IV Five versts away from Krasnogorye,
IV She loved the Russian winter season
Iv But it is time I was returning
Ivan Petrovich ne’er was keen,
IX Can scarce be faithful to her grief.
IX Herein demanded satisfaction.
IX Of many a wild fit of folly.
IX That shine with an harmonious luster . , »
I’d bring you nothing but distress.
I’ll have a duel with my friend.
I’ll not debate the point. Ye gods!
(I’m certain that you know the chap), 
I’ve always thought well suited to 
I’ve married off my younger daughter,
ill My path was what the crowd was choosing;
I And you, small fruit of eager labor:
7 I am an altered man and quiet.
I blame you . . . For you acted boldly. 
I called Odessa dusty —
"I cannot help it: I am weeping . . .
I drag myself about; timers hasting.
I fear lest in my supplication
I first saw young Tatyana glide 
I freeze — good God! — ^recalling how
I heard her friendly accents soften;
I know your heart; I need not tremble.
I love you (why should I dissemble?)
I married. Now, I beg you, go.
I must be certain in the morning
I must say candid words or none.
I say: give up a style outmoded.
I shall be true to him through life.”
I strolled into the farmyard — faugh!
I take a stroll. Now cups are clinking
I take my leave of you — farewell.
I thank you from my inmost soul . . .
I took this peace, this liberty.
I want my peace, my pot of stchi.
I was in too much haste, I fear;
I would prefer your harsh cold fashion
^'Idol mid’^ or ^^Benedetta^^'^
If you but knew how agonizing
If you recall your Tanya still,
Immersed in it the houses founder;
Important folk, and is it true 
In any small degree betrayed her:
In dust . . . But there the skies are bright; 
In mind: that if I had my will,
In short, and I was proud of her.
In soul, of all the guests the least 
In that swift moment one could see
In the dark hours ere Morpheus, flying,
In the steep shade a camel lying;
In torment at your feet to swoon —
In triumph at the joyous shore;
In truth what brought you here today? 
In youth, were such the joys I’d count on?
Indeed what can I hope for ^ after
Indeed, you played a noble role:
Inspired Mickiewicz used to stand 
19 Into the square the crowd is rushing,
Is he bewitched? It’s very droll.
Is it because intelligence
Is it because we like to sit
Is it the music’s fascination
Is there a sign of tears? No trace! 
Is trained on her whose features dimly 
Is weeping, weeping quietly.
It is to parch with hot desire^
It may not be: without relief,
It wrong to scorn when pride commanded —
Its parti-colored pageantry.
Its tale of humble lives, where now 
Its waves on shores that rise up sheer;
It’s frowned on in society.
It’s late. Odessa sleeps, unruffled;
It’s maddening to see before you
It’s time he ceased to be a show . .
IV How often, by her tales diverted
IX Upon the judgment-seat, or merely
I’d give my house and all that’s in it.
I’ll go!” And he does not defer
I’ve finished cantos nine, no more;
in the guise of reproach, lauds Louis XIV. Our ladies 
ing; he also remembered his favorite sister. Lagan, 
In Russia, where for lack of historical memoirs,
important minor poet and a friend of Pushkin’s. For 
in a poem by Pushkin’s uncle, whence the cousinship.
It causes frenzy, aberrations.
Its fateful harassments indeed
it. The last of these reads:
I watched her spouse, with time to spare;
It was today I met the beauty;
imagination. K. used to relate that having once been 
in the first edition. It is possible, however, that Push- 
is, Wilhelm Kuchelbecker, the schoolmate mentioned 
Ilya, the cautious, prone to balk.
In 1812 ? The folk’s resistance,
"Inspired Mickiewicz”: Adam Mickiewicz, the
It gave the tyrant it deserted
It seemed so, but . . .
JA MORALE EST DANS LA NATURE DES CHOSES.
Julie, Clarissa, or Delphine;
Just as the social rites demanded.
Just as the stars had left off dancing.
Just fancy who appears from under!
Just for a dash of lemon waiting.
Just for the sake of being heard.
Just grown-up mischief-makers’ games.
Just here and there hard labor lately
'^Just look . . . that man . . . he’s one of three 
Just now a walk w’ould suit me best.
Just now our roads are bad for coaches;
Just now, did I not see you flitting
Just think, this joy, I can’t endure it.
Just to enjoy the obsequies.
K. VYAZEMSKY
K., who is so well known for the playfulness of his 
Katenin at a later day 
Keen air, and trots without a goad;
Keeping his morning coffee waiting.
Killed by familiarity;
Kind drones, and you who wisely savor
Kind habit soothed her sorrow sweetly.
Kind, cheerful nature, it is bitter
Kishinev in the autumn of 1822 to his brother; "/e
Knyazhnin played ape there without end,
Kuchelbecker, a schoolmate of Pushkin’s who was a 
kin was addressing not Shishkov, but Wilhelm, that 
kin was traveling in the Crimea in 1820 he visited the 
Lamenting in new songs and dirges 
Late nights, yes, and a facile art;
Like fellowship, as I regale 
Like prisoners released in sleep
Like silver dust the snowflakes lie.
Like Venus’ very self emerging.
Low cunning must assist devotion
li But I am here and he is yonder:
liii With friends and foes come from a distance
lit) The shady thickets’ cool, begirting
Let no sly reader be so daring —
Like Byron, pride’s consummate poet;
Like Petrarch, he finds love less cruel. 
llX And as of old I mix, free-hearted.
lx My novel finds me in good fettle
Lay hid in all the prose they uttered —
Lensky was thought an eligible,
Let critics wreak their indignation
Let him believe in wonders still
Life was a riddle he would solve.
Light quit-rent, and the slave, well suited
Liked hearty guests who ate and drank,
Liqueurs, a ledger, applejack,
Living the chapters through, she’d glory
liULFILATRE
Ladies he left he never missed.
Lays claim to the young girl’s attention; 
Led me to church. I had to go.
Lest, sick of pleasure, momently
"Let’s go.”
LETTER I know of whot I am deserving —
Lest they should miss us beyond reason
Let the sonorous stanzas roll;
Let’s call some time. Take my advice;
Lies in your hands, for you to fashion;
Like Hippocrene it sparkles brightly.
Lives there a poet who rehearses
Long hours, the melodies I mend,
Long live Bordeaux, the faithful friend!
Long since her dreams had set her yearning
Long since with sweet disquietude
Looks backward; lightning-like she rushes 
Lost like a muted sound and vanished.
Love your own self and so have done!
Love’s discourse, perilous, delicious,
li Is he who can believe a fiction.
LA SOTTO WORM NUBIiOSI E BREVI
Leading his offspring, Kharlikov;
Leaps for a knife, and Lensky falls;
Left of the village where the poet
Lensky can scarcely trust his eyes.
(Lepage’s work), and has him tie 
Let me look back. Farewell, then, bowers
Let not the poet’s heart know capture
Life’s vista gleams before it yet.
Like a poor sot to shelter reeling
Like bees that from the hive are pouring 
Like Delwig drunk in company.
Like giddy youth forever swirling
Like secret promenades in sleighs;
Like this since first the world began;
Like those whom an old feud inflames.
Line up with children of all ages:
Lo! the opinion of the rabble
Look back she dare not; fear would blind her;
Looks round: the bear is gone, at least; 
/■ ■ ;|l nil 1 1 y
Lest the young lady should be hurt.
Like smoke across the azure drifted;
Long since, but notice if you please 
Lord Byron’s tales, which well consorted
love with someone?” ”But who is it?
Let alone grief ... I have no strength . . .
Like fire, the gilded crosses rise 
Lions on gates with great stone jaws,
Lubov Petrovna lies as quickly,
Lukerya Lvovna still paints thickly,
li The blare, the lights, the shining glances.
Like to the moon in lonely pride.
liii While unobserved, Tatyana’s sitting
liv When a great general, espying
Light nothings, spoken without guile 
Like a Bacchante at the revels.
Like leaves that in wet autumn stray. 
Like pale Lenore, by moonlight she
Long evening pass, while he would sit 
Looking too corpselike to be nobby.
Loves elbow-room and thrusts us hence?
li To them . . . alas, some now are distant,
Let critics carp, he will not grovel:
Lies spread the famous annual fair.
Like this decrepit publican?
Line 14* Written during the author’s exile in Bess-
Lorgnette in hand, our friend would wander,
left one unfinished, indicating the gap either by dots 
Line 13. Breguet: a repeater which took its name
Line 6. Kaverin: an officer of the Hussars who,
like his close friend, Pushkin, was addicted to both 
Line 8. There was an exceptionally fine vintage in
lerina; she danced in a ballet, arranged by Didelot, 
lines from Rousseau’s Confessions, he wrote: ^’Grimm 
little brush.”
Line 10. On his mother’s side, the author is of
Line 10. The emblems of the classical stage.
list, author of a satire on writers of odes.
Lafontaine, a German writer of the period who pro- 
Lines 13-14. See the description of the Finnish
lana,” the heroine makes the same preparations that 
lines run:
Like any illness: spleen, or plague;
Like fevers it can burn and freeze us.
Like madness make us wild and vague;
Line 11. Lei: a Slavonic divinity, of dubious
Line 4. Bichat: an eighteenth-century French
Line 9, The poet is presumably referring to Prince
Line 9. Two Petriads: poems about Peter the
Lines 8-14. Pushkin spent eight years on the
Lines 9-10. It has been conjectured that the refer-
Lord help us, friends! To be accursed
9|« ^ 9l<
Long years, maybe, a sudden spark . . .
MAKES HASTE TO LIVE AND CANNOT WAIT TO FEEL.
Maidens, come and trip it now,
'"^Make way! Make way!” along they fly.
Malek-Adhel and de Linar,
Many a distant love-affair —
’May I but live to see the day!
May pay attention to his nails;
May speak, like a fond friend, of me.
May wear the laurel -crown of fame,
Meanwhile, forget all toil and trouble,
Meanwhile, in morning costume, gaily
Meanwhile, the moon her silver duty
Men’s malice and the stroke of Fate.
Merrily^ my laughing ones.
’Mid all the conquests that he vaunted? 
Might dash away as they were nearing.
Monsieur FAbbe, a Frenchman, seedy,
Monsieur was sent upon his way.
More lingeringly half the world.
Most blessed is he who never knew them.
”Move up the table, give me paper,
Much to enchant his virgin mind.
Must breathe no word, must never mention
"My child, you’re ill! The Lord have mercy!
My country, and an exile’s lot —
My Eugene was [Chadayev] second:
My earnest counsels prithee heed.
My fair Russian Terpsichore?
My fondness for it is but slight;
My friends. Perhaps, by heaven’s decree,
My girlish dreams forever stilled.
My goddesses! How shall I trace you?
My heart to one, and one alone!
My heart will as of old be shaken.
My husband’s folk . . . But do you hear?”
My labors, yet perhaps this name 
My letter to Onegin.” ”Bless me,
My lips were envious of their blisses!
My mother-in-law would have raged.”
My name . . .” ^'^Yes, but to whom, my dear?
My poet friends, inclined to stammer
My restless thoughts, and I must perish. 
My services in time of need:
My stanza, saved by jealous fate,
My thanks, friend, you will not refuse.
My words may move some unborn lover;
My youth fled by, remembrance clings.
My youth in slothful sweet content?
maids’ song Come and form a circle and
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot;
Made game of fools, and being bent 
Makes Eugene quake with consternation.
Malvine — because the set was broken 
Mammas and aunts who pry and peer.
May Heaven blast your page, amen!
May his soul now be with the blest.
May pass me by or pierce me through;
Mayhap he would have been reputed.
Mayhap the lyre so early muted
Me if you must: I can’t translate.
(Mechanically, as they say),
’Mid maids and matrons seems to glide
Might have united them anew!
Mile-posts rejoice the idle eye,
’Mongst thinkers who are few and cloudy, 
More horrors: here a lobster riding
More often now the sun was clouded;
More than a brother’s love for you.
Most fearful and most wonderful!
Move plates and chairs with ready glee,
MOSCOW, Russia’s darling daughter,
Monsieur Finemouche, friend of the house, 
Moscow: those syllables can start
Most harshly: there was no disguising
Must in this matter be your guide.
Must leave my hero, ruefully,
Mute anger only marks her face . . .
Mute, motionless, and cherub -faced;
My brainless pupil almost learned
My childish dreams, my tender years,
My conscience speaks — ^pray let me finish;
My cousin, sleepy-eyed Buyanov,
My days are counted: Fve had warning;
My dear, is an important matter:
My dear, when old age comes at length
My Eugene through the winter tarried.
My flighty friend made quite a stir.
My frivolous and merry youth!
My Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
My handsome house and my soirees —
My lively cousin now advancing.
My love, first warm, would soon diminish, 
My Lensky’s fury grows apace;
My labors — bless them with thy beauty^
My legs betray me . . . But it’s tiring
My little book. With you I knew
My little nook do not forsake;
My meaning? Nothing. Aly intention
My Moscow offered Bonaparte —
My Muse to a superb soiree;
My mother coaxed and wept; the sequel
My mournful secret you will shun me:
My poor nurse sleeps beneath the bough . . .
''My second?” Eugene said, "Permit me;
My soul with dreams that challenge reason. 
My soul’s fair crystal, what surpasses
My story out, and it is wrong 
My stricken heart cries out and fails me
My student cell grew bright with treasures
My style and my affairs improving.
My thanks for all the hours of gladness,
My thanks. Alike in peace and riot 
My thoughts in exile turned to you,
My tuneful stanzas forth till they 
My worthy friend. Monsieur Guillot.
Myself mistaken, did not dare 
mirable poetic talent from being a fine critic) has 
Mashuk, most health-giving of mountains;
Means labor fit to break the back . . .
My high-flown fancies have departed.
magazine is named; it was The Well-Intentioned.
man.”
mar: characters in La Nouvelle Heloise, by Rousseau.
ment worthy of Childe Harold. M. Didelot’s ballets 
minor poet and author of an essay in praise of the ode.
moral purity with that Oriental charm which so cap- 
(Moor Ali). It was rumored that he had been an 
N'est-ce pas, for all we want of talk? 
NASCE UNA GENTE A CUI L’MORIR NON DOLE.
Nay, she must hate her brother’s slayer.
Neva, oh, offspring of my pen.
NECKER
Near by (when springtime rains have peppered
Near by, she saw the mansion standing.
Never shall I my soul renew . . .
New leaves for those the tempests scatter. 
New sorrows come, my heart to fret;
New warmth has melted winter’s chain; 
Next day before the sun was high.
Night falls; the moon, already riding
No bard was keen as I to follow
No card-game, poetry, or ball.
No coarse mot of a witty snob.
No fancy of a worldly mob.
No feast, no gift to warm his heart:
No finer, but just finicky.
No gift but weariness and anguish 
No grace, no flash of merriment.
No longer fearful of disaster.
No look, no tremor, not a word
No matter: lisping like a child,
No matter— ah, but look with favor
No more a reason for emotion,
No more can hoyden rhymes detain me,
No more I find it quite so pressing
No more my Eugene could discern . . .
No more the casual pen is led 
No more the vogue, you will allow.
No other entertainment needing.
No partner ever was so sprightly.
No respite to his heart is granted —
No rival in the girl’s affection . , .
No rung would suit him but the top —
No savoir vivre^ no hint of verse;
No shadow could be faithfuUer.
No single sound escapes from her;
No smart conceits does Lensky fashion
No syllable of sentiment.
No witty thought occurs, no word
”No, nobody! You’re quite secure,
No, passion never wrought for me
No, silent, wild, and melancholy,
No, soon the world began to bore him.
No, to he with you constantly;
No, when with youth and love on fire,
"No.” "Gladly.” "When?” "At once. You’ll see
None was so quick as he at trapping
Nor bends to fashion’s tyrannies:
Nor calls them, noons, for mustering;
Nor cards, nor gossip, chased his gloom; 
Nor distance, changed his earnest mood
Nor eases tears too long suppressed.
Nor from his greedy lips withdraws 
Nor full of idle chat and silly;
Nor noisy games, nor foreign beauties.
Nor read the ending of the story.
Nor reckoned days as they went by,
Nor shown a fighter’s predilection.
Nor soothes the ache within her breast.
Nor studies such as pedants choose,
Nor was she found with head inclining
Nor yet the cuckold, stout and haughty.
Nor yet were her soft lips compressed.
Nor, from the loge and the parterre,
Not aiming yet, advance four paces.
Not all Onegin’s observation
Not deep or learned or intense.
Not for you our songs are sung.
Not hesitating to awake him.
Not hours when he fulfilled the duties
Not knowing in the morning where
Not knowing you, I would not thus
Not like a cool coquette w^ho tenders
Not long the Larin house was waking
Not now. I love my hero truly.
Not now: we, like the ladies, proudly
”Not on my income, more’s the pity!”
Not only did she fail to shiver.
Not pain, but death. Thus, sparkling whitely
Not so his calculating neighbor
Not thus have sought to cut a dash.
Not what you have, but what you see 
Not with a notion of delighting
(Not with fine words are parsnips buttered);
Nothing attracted his attention.
Now cut the ice with scraping noise;
Now five steps more the pair have made.
Now from the dish where they are lying
Now from the shed at crack of dawn
Now having given due attention
Now I am at your mercy, guided
Now in his study he bethought him
Now Lovelace’s renown is faded.
Now met his spouse. The princess gazed 
Now my companions are inquiring:
Now my Onegin, keen as brandy.
Now nearer! Galloping . . . and here 
Now on what flowers are they set?
Now Olga sits before it, filling
Now serpentine she twists and wheels,
Now sleeps the scion of delight.
Now soothed by this anticipation.
Now southward swept the caravan
Now stirred? Is it vexation moving 
Now the mazurka’s strains are sounding.
Now through the open meadow faring,
Now with what eager concentration
Now Yule-tide brings its fun and folly.
Now" let me speak of something jolly.
'nine,’ and to sacrifice one of the final stanzas:
numeral; but, to avoid scandal, he decided to number 
No breath disturbs the warm still night.
No matter. Why should we be asking
No sooner did the cannon, sounding
No sound, save for the soft slow roar
Noise, chatter, on the table shine
Now different scenes delight my senses:
not all of which it seemed necessary to reproduce 
Notes here. Those not marked ^'Pushkin” have been added
name by Mme. de StaS.
name of another friend of Pushkin’s which is absent 
named after the South American liberator, which was 
nation. Some of the stanzas seem not to have been 
never wrote fortune-books himself. — Pushkin.
not clear what moved him to make these omissions. 
novel by Charles Nodier.
novel by Louvet de Couvrai, an eighteenth-century 
novel by Mme. Cottin, an eighteenth-century writer; 
Napoleon.
Neva, but in those warmer climes 
Nikita, restless, keen for glory,
No punishment is equal to it.
Not far from Bonaparte’s tent.
Obeying folly’s least suggestion,
Obeying the spring sun’s commands,
Obeys her feelings sans demur?
Oblige me! Is it such hard labor?”
Oblivion is waiting for us
Observe his closet well, and gage
Observe it with a yawn at last,
Observed the girl’s embarrassed air.
Obtaining, with himself to thank.
Odessa was my home then, shrouded
Of a most tyrannous young fop.
Of all sorts; finally you hear 
Of all the dreams the heart can hold.
Of any nonsense I set down,
Of comme il faut — Shishkov, berate 
Of corks, with much the same attention 
^’Of course not, darling, only say ...”
Of course young Lensky felt no yearning
Of course you’ve often seen that treasure.
Of course, one should reward his gabble
Of curses: he’s gone home to change.
Of Cleopatra, but whose features.
Of days long past, when he had been
Of destiny and its defiance.
Of distance, promising delight;
Of elegies at some far date 
Of fables, and a grammar too.
Of feasts and sundry foods and eke 
Of finding worn-out prejudices.
Of fools, and slyly whispered quips ...”
Of good and evil, and of science,
Of heels the stout parquet would quake,
Of heirs is heard, indecently 
Of her companions in the blue.
Of her demure provincial ways,
Of her own heart’s shy hopes and fears;
Of her researches quite forgets
Of high desires and deep regret,
Of him had filled his simple youth,
Of his old uncle’s illness heard?
Of innocent felicity.
Of intimacies of the past.
Of jdowers, for our modest dwelling.
Of jealous pangs, and separation,
Of lovely lady, modish sir.
Of Lensky’s troth there was no chatter:
Of Lovelace or of Grandison,
Of letters running to six pages.
Of life has perished like a flower 
Of life’s gay feast ere time is up,
Of loud farewells and crying maids;
Of loves that to the grave endure;
”Of maids and creatures superhuman?
Of making such a choice, I know;
Of Moscow beaus and Moscow Circes!
Of memory, or welcome rest,
Of my young friend I sing, and of
Of Olga’s looks alive to me.
Of old the ballroom used to shake 
Of park and palace, dome and spire,
Of plates and silverware increases,
Of prejudice’s ancient yoke,
Of prudence now I drink Bordeaux.
Of quiet summer nights, how often,
Of seething hopes and giddy play,
Of silence he had lain at rest
Of some attractive little thing.
Of some imported wild romance. 
Of such a manner, I’m pedantic.
Of syllables so musical 
Of Sundays, putting on his glasses,
Of seeing you by afternoon . . . .
Of snow, and wash her face and chest.
Of speech to this insulting passion.
Of speech, and earn the mockery 
Of speech? For what malicious laughter 
Of that dread mystery, the grave;
Of that lost hour beneath the tree 
Of the Black Sea upon the shore.
Of the magnificent Neva.
Of the wild geese, a noisy clan;
Of this and that, to his distress;
Of this cold world, his soul would bless 
Of those he wished her to forget!
Of tulle she wore in other days;
Of welcome are indeed heart-rending.
Of what is common, what is grand;
Of what, in fashionable diction
Of which I’ve lost the habit now.
Of which Onegin never tired.
Of whom ’twas said throughout his span:
Of wintry pleasures; you will dote 
Of worldly scorn, and thus are fed.
Of youth renewed beside these streams.
Of youthful pranks and childish pleasures, 
Off in a narrow lane, at last.
Off in the cotmtry we can say
Off in the wilds — ^is it not true? — 
Off to the ball as is required,
Off to the country promptly packed her,
Offended vanity or spleen?
Oh, Brenta! I shall yet rejoice
Oh, I have erred sufficiently
Oh, land of boundless fascination!
Oh, once again will you be singing
Oh, waters of the Adriatic!
Oh, yes. But there’s the whirl of fashion.
OH, YES, what’s FAR AWAY, THAT WE PREFER!
Oh, empty world! Oh, stupid folk
Oh, horror! Better far to stay
Oh, humans, like your first mamma.
Oh, Moscow, Moscow! I would view
Old duelist can be malicious:
Old fogies all, chained to tradition,
Old monkeys of another age 
Old W’omen, boys with cheeks like cherries,
Old women smiled as she went by;
Old-fashioned hospitality.
Olenka too began to yawn,
Ombre and Boston claim the old,
On Apuleius gladly nourished.
On balls I also used to dote:
On down to where the river flows.
On elegance her mind w^as bent.
On every single suitor’s hopes?
On foreign scenes to feast our eyes;
On hearing this, Zaretzky started
On her loose hair, her tears, and on 
On horseback; such close friends were they 
On other paths, since youth is spent,
On past the bright parterre, the lawn.
On sentiment we draw the curtain;
On the bleak steppe go horseback-riding?
On the far bank the smoky fire
On the first page there’s this confection:
On themes to which none now alludes,
On through the field the girl will ride, 
On us the favors that men crave;
On whom shall we bestow affection,
On writing of another man.
On your protection till I die . . .
Once dwelt, two pines are intertwined —
Once free, and night will find me gloating
Once graced the devil’s own abode,
’’Once in those arms I lay contented,
Once lechery that took its pleasure
Once more Tatyana’s heart is drumming;
Once Vyazemsky sat down beside her
One cherished fancy for another
One clownish fellow, idly leaning
One day when leading his battalion.
One finger’s frostbitten, of course.
One foot upon the floor is planted.
One has a cock’s head plain to see,
One heard the crickets’ slender choir.
One hears the clicking of a cock.
One is a horned and dog-faced creature,
One line, held in the memory.
One saw the cheerful morning smile;
One takes a risk in such discussion,
One thing alone he loved, he breathed;
One thing alone to think upon 
One thought must fill your heart with pain:
One who has lived and thought, grows scornful.
One whose embittered mind finds zest
One whose warm kindness has no end —
One window glimmers bright and rosy.
Onegin (I return to him).
Onegin a pure rapture felt.
Onegin comes, apologizing.
Onegin fires . . . oh, hapless men.
Onegin flies to taste the blisses
Onegin fumbles as he seeks 
Onegin grips his pistol tightly,
Onegin heard the sweet confession
’’Onegin is a boor, a mason;
Onegin leaned above the river
Onegin now decides he’ll cater
Onegin searched the cupboards, finding
Onegin sits and drinks a health,
Onegin sleeps and does not worry.
Onegin the cotillion. Lord!
Onegin too. '"^At last, oh, dear!”
Onegin took the letter to
Onegin turned to Lensky next:
Onegin was allowed to hear 
Onegin without hesitating
Onegin, also far away.
Onegin, frozen with despair.
Onegin, like Childe Harold, scorning
Onegin, meet him, born and nourished
Onegin, what shrewd line expressed 
Onegin, wiseacres aplenty
Onegin’s form, Onegin’s face.
Onegin’s holy life; unheeding,
Onegin’s taste for books had vanished
Onegin’s traits with mine comparing —
Onegin’s waiting for us now.”
Only a dream? It could not be!
Only the faznily, I’m sure.
ONEGIN’S LETTER
On all but him! She never sees 
On the streaked ice the sunbeams play;
Once more forsakes society.
Onegin watches her, congealed:
Onegin, and I loved you; well? 
Onegin, but she seems to freeze 
Onegin, need I ask you whether
Onegin, that familiar place.
Onegin: Chapter Eight
Oneginas Travels
Onegin’s letter A trick worthy of detestation;
Onegin’s portrait has been finished,
ONEGIN TRAVELS TO ASTRAKHAN,
On everything and everyone:
On scenes both various and motley.
On stilts the bold pedestrian
4 Onegin’s wistful observation
Open the window; come, sit here.”
Or (since it’s ugly to be drunk)
Or a deserved reproach will show
Or after dinner I may vary
Or are our thoughts in truth so cruel
Or as a Quaker go appareled,
Or because Heaven gifted her
Or bows to him — a cold convention;
Or brought his longing quietude.
Or burn with sudden eloquence!
Or by an accidental sneer.
Or by the fiureplace set at rest.
Or caU the actress he preferred
Or climbing down the rocky shore.
Or does he follow his old bent 
Or does not care; and all agree 
Or else (joking aside) while strolling
Or else a smile that’s pure deception,
Or else he may, dehberately.
Or else my demon — condemnation
Or else — or else — , else God forbid!
Or Fashion Journal, could enthrall
Or gloriously served the world;
Or graced by Baratynsky’s pen,
Or greet a luckless Phedre with Msses,
Or in a fit of blind vexation
Or in the end will he just be
Or in the morning, arm in arm.
Or in the shoulder feel a touch
Or into concord gently shame them.
Or is it that we fail to cherish
Or is stupidity malicious —
Or it may be his martyred shade
Or it may be that we are taken
Or kiss the hem of her dear dress.
Or less, that I should hear you speak.
Or letters that a girl might write.
Or light verse that our fathers read.
Or like an air from Freischiitz played
Or like, up in the silly sky.
Or love, the grave concern of youth?
Or merely some mistakes in grammar,
Or more times JBrom her Moscow cousin, 
Or must I with dull glances follow
Or on the garden gazes out . . .
Or on the sheet another wrote on,
Or paint the villain’s agony;
Or post-horses, if thus inclined.
Or prose and verse — ^in naught the same.
Or rouse a journalistic clamor.
Or shining with the summoned tear!
Or sweetly use the flatterer’s tongue;
Or Seneca’s, or Byron’s pages,
Or somehow couldn’t quite prevent it.
Or the old uncle’s, I shall tell
Or touch to flame a rosy cheek,
Or wait for her hot cheeks to cool.
Or was the time of sorrow brief?
Or when through liveried throngs he’s thrusting
Or when, the world about me reeling,
Or with such urgent ardor seek
Or, lulled by Lethe’s quiet flowing,
Ordains it so: I am your own.
Orestes vied there with his friend,
Oton is so accommodating.
Our dapper coachmen are astounding,
Our freshest dreams grew sear, and scattered 
Our grandchildren evict us too.
Our hero took the marble stair,
Our hero, lived not so long since.
Our Lensky’s village, lives and thrives,
Our marriage w-ould mean misery.
Our native tongue turns up its nose
Our northern summer, swiftly flying,
Our songs, but are not worth the singing. 
Our sorrows and our smaller cares,
Our talkative young eremites;
Our time will come when it is due,
Our troikas tireless, forward bounding.
Out from the house the serf -boys fly,
Out of her swaddling-clothes, she’s fairly 
Out of the window she may stare —
Over some ordinary matter.
Ovid, who found, so far from Rome,
O’er her embroidery, designing 
O’er Petersburg’s dark pavements borne 
O’ergrown. No wreath hangs on the bough; 
of approval current in Russia at the time.
of cabbage.
of death, while Pussy foretells a wedding. Its opening 
of our critics, ”that boys are ice-skating.” Right.
of Pushkin’s, translated French tragedies, while Shak- 
of the carriage, was knocking against the mile-posts 
of the Neva,” by Muravyov.
of these novels was Adolphe^ by Benjamin Constant.
on rural economy. — Pushkin.
on the Black Sea, when the author was in quasi-exile.
or by giving merely the number of the stanza. It is 
original the husband shouts, "fora!”, the Italian cry 
Of idle youth that no one blames,
Of Kamenka’s deep groves and hilly 
On plucking the two-headed eagle 
Or native vodka, all together . . .
Our Czar was dozing . . .
Over a friendly glass of wine.
P. A. Katenin (who is not prevented by his ad-
Page after page, says not a word.
Paid them the tribute of a sigh.
Pale nature shudders, tempest -tossed.
Pale valley and the silver stream;
Parks, pharmacies, Bohkarans, guards.
Parny’s sad tenderness is now
Past sentry-boxes now they dash,
Past shops and lamp-posts, serfs who lash
Past the Neva in a swift sleigh;
Past thick-ranked guests, aristocratic,
Pelt the lad with cherries ripe.
Perchance he briefly knew the fever
Performing, lit the girl’s pale beauty,
Perfumes in crystal cut with care;
Perhaps some lady may find matter 
Perhaps this is a mad delusion^
Perhaps what kept him was the mail,”
Perhaps, heeding the journals’ clamor.
PETRARCH
Perchance a humble lot awaited
Perchance he would have earned the wages
Perhaps ’twill please you if I quote 
Philosophers have calculated 
Place a proud vale at the end.
Plants cabbages like old Horatius,
Plucks at the ear-rings she is wearing,
Plump Pustyakov strides heavily;
Plunged into sadness beyond measure. 
Poets, it is my observation,
Points out my portrait unctuously.
Poor dreamer whom he sadly harried;
Poor Lensky cannot bear his sorrow.
Poor Lensky fell . . . that luckless day.
Poor Lensky scarce knew what to say.
Poor Lensky! Olga’s heart was laden
Poor Lensky! Past the grave’s grim portal.
Poor Tanya, lighted by Diana,
Poor Tanya’s youth is fading fast,
Pops; the wine fizzes; and Triquet,
Pores o’er a letter, in seclusion;
Portraying happy love for you;
Pour from the boughs where she is hiding. 
Pranks (like love’s dream, another folly)
Praskovya she would call '^Pauline”;
Pray God I do not come upon it
Pray introduce me.” "You are jesting.”
Pray say farewell as to a friend.
Pray whom now does he represent?
Prefigures joy to come, or doom;
Prepare with him to leave the place 
Presents the charming sisters both 
Presents to the Neva a view 
Pretending calmness, Tanya quitted 
Prevail. Two words she softly mutters, 
Princess Aline, when she was young,
''Princesses ’Tachettel I can’t believe it!”
Proceed, my tale! Here’s matter for ye,
Pronounced most learned, though not yet twenty.
Prophetic of a priceless pleasure,
Propped on her elbow, she is writing. 
Proud worldlings, but to pleasure you,
Proves rustic ingenuity!).
Pursued in flight by flaming glances;
Pursued with so much elegance;
Pussy is what the girls prefer.
plan of the whole composition; for, as a result, the 
pointed out to us that the omission, though perhaps 
Possessed me, underneath your spell, 
Pray, did your ceaseless clamor start
Proud Slav and stout Moldavian muster;
Pushkin provided the novel with a number of notes,
pearing in later editions.
Pushkin discarded, see Note to Chapter VI, Stanza
Pushkin occasionally omitted one or more stanzas, or 
played Shakespearean roles and acted in the tragedies 
poetry in them than in the whole of French literature. 
— ^Pushkin.
parfaitement comme ilfauV^
personal enmity, was transferred to Siberia under a 
poet” mentioned in a lyric entitled, ”To the Goddess 
Prisoner of the Caucasus,” and "The Fountain of 
— Pushkin.
plicitly to the verse of Bogdanovich, an eighteenth- 
Pages and sent to Finland to serve as a private.
phrasing a remark he made in a letter written from
— Pushkin.
Pushkin’s day.
place opposite her at the table; she falls asleep, and 
political writings were popular in Russia.
published under the imprint of Martin Zadeka, a 
Priest was a caricaturist of the period.
Pushkin in St. Petersburg in 1829, and commented on 
Pyotr Vyazemsky, a minor author and brilliant con- 
physiologist; Tissot: a French historian of the period.
Page 159. '^Orestes vied there with his friend”:
Page 160. "Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain”: the so-
Page 160. trepak'^: a boisterous peasant dance.
Page 161. "Egypt’s retired corsair”: during his
Page 161. Tumansky: Vasily Ivanovich Tuman-
Page 163. "Shouts bravo in his sleep”: in the
Page 163. Oton: Cesar Oton kept an inn at which
Persian poet’s writings.
Polish poet, visited the Crimea in 1825, and there 
Pontus, who committed suicide.
Pushkin stopped when he first arrived in Odessa.
Pushkin’s poem, "The Fountain of Bakhchi-Sarai.”
^^Qu^ecrirez-vous sur ces tablettes?^^
Quit of the shore’s dull element?
Quite free of all his debts at fifty.
Quite withered now in very truth?
Quote Virgil, not a long selection.
Racine or Virgil, Walter Scott,
Raise doubts that leave his heart perplexed,
Rapt eloquence in speech and song.
Recall Dmitriyev’s castigation;
Recall with pain the vanished boon:
Recalling in the soft sweet air
Reciting all their hopes with candor,
Recovered, Tanya, pale and shrinking,
Refuse to let you sleep a wink;
Regards. But Olga, oh, my friend, \ ou 
Relating with romantic art
Released j&:om the damp cork, the bottle
Remained his friends, I grant you this.
Remarks the jew^els and the laces,
Remembering the past, perforce 
Remind him of a face forgot.
Renowned, resplendent, diplomatic.
Repeatedly and almost grimly 
Replied as though he little cared 
Reply, Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain!
Reread I cannot ... I must end . . .
Responded: "Why should we delay?”
Responding to his hasty ringing.
Rests on the smoky streams, and he 
Revealing to their haughty gaze
Reveals herself in every scene;
Reveillez-vous^ belle endormie.
Revenge approaches, so, concealing
Revenge was something of a pleasure,
Reviews the past in wistful fashion:
Revived the grandeur of Corneille;
Rich empty rooms Onegin came 
Ripe daughters, dressed in last year’s fashions. 
Rolled by in peace; sometimes the neighbors
Romancer, having settled on 
Romances, upon every page 
Round old Moet or Veuve Cliquot; 
Roused at her wonted hour from rest,
Rousseau (forgive me if I chatter)
Runs smoothly as a hackneyed song.
Runs to the poor youth lying there.
0 Rus!
rateur. — Pushkin.
Regent’s army; he returned to Russia with a split 
received, for a poem of his own composition, the con- 
refuge from the fires that were ravaging the city.
reputed ruins of the tomb of Mithridates, the king of 
Renowned for trenchant oratory.
Sacred to scions of Apollo!
Sad murmur of the soul’s complaint.
Sad murmurs filled the woodland ways
Safe in the woodland, hid away.
Sang for the guests across the wine,
Save for the chorus on the hill
Say who it is that now the Spanish 
Say, now, my friend, what will you feel
Says Tanya, ^'Nay, I am not grumbling:
Says ’yes’ and ’no,’ but never ’sir.’ ”
Scarce breathing, making no replies,
Schiller, of course, by candle-light.
Scrawled over by her friends at leisure
Screws up his eye and is preparing
Search Russia through, you’ll scarce discover
Second: the poet was a fool.
Secure a tryst with tender art,
Sed alia temporal Such jolly
Seduce you, though the cost be frightful. 
Seduction ceased to be amusing,
Seeing the molten wax assume
Seeks omens in the song they sing;
Seemed sunk in gloom, or bold and free.
Self-centered and indifferent.
Semyon Petrovich is as mean.
Semyonova there wrought her magic 
Set huckleberry syrup out.
Shall greet you. Go, my dear creation:
Shall I be thirty presently?
Shall I depict less with a prudent
Shall know the secrets of the grave,
She asks: ”The left? What’s there to see?”
She at a table took her place
She bade me hear the waters sing,
She breathes again and yet again,
She can no more, her strength is gone*
She cannot. No? But why? She’s given
She chides the waters that impede her^
She clambered up a hill, commanding
She conned the talk against her will;
She could but peak and pine and weep,
She cries: ^'Whom, Tanya, did you see?”
She dare not lift, for shame and fear.
She did not speak the language well
She did the overseeing; cool
She does not argue: by delaying
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
She does not heed: and sore it grieves him
She does not raise him, leaves him kneeling;
She does not sniff the cold, or run
She dreams. And wonders are appearing
She drops her handkerchief, and shivers,
She falls . . .
She falls into the snow; alertly
She fancied ghosts behind her stalking.
She fears the dream bodes only ill.
She finds; abyss, ape, bear, bridge, cave,
She flies, a thing of down, enchanted;
She flies, she flies, nor in her flight 
She followed, as he did, the fashion;
She found in a romantic story
She found the margins most appealing:
She gazes at him without pause . . .
She glances at the road, distressed.
She glides; and now serenely stops,
She had not read with fascination
She halted at the gate-way, telling
She halted, like one scorched by fire. 
She has no aim, no occupation.
She has no trace of coquetry —
She hates their having come at all.
She hears it all at every visit.
She hears the raucous laughter swell 
She hurries, but the dreadful shape
She is alone, alack-a-day!
She is not hurried, is not chilly,
She knew, I wonder how. I fear
She knows her role! With none to thank — 
She lacked her sister’s charm, and wanted
She lacks the look of snobbishness,
She lies as though she has not heard,
She lies for hours, with sleep uncertain;
She likes the talk of haughty sages
She looks about in puzzled sort.
She looks about, with heart that flutters:
She looks at him in some dismay.
She looks on nothing with delight.
She looks, half soothed and half excited,
She lost her Frenchy airs and graces;
She loves an uhlan with devotion . . .
She loves him still; and in remorse,
She loves the secrets that environ 
She might return; yes, if permitted. 
She must accept at last, I thought.
She noted, trembling and excited.
She pickled mushrooms with her cooks;
She pinched her waist with tightened laces,
She puzzles till she is distracted,
She quaked at omens; all around her
She reads the sweet romance, and how
She rises as the morning flushes
She runs, he follows on and on;
She said "Akulka” for Celine;
"She sat beside the window. She
She searches for a passage showing
She seemed a stranger to her own.
She seems the image quite perfected
She sees . . . Why, who would credit it? 
She sees a court she does not know,
She shared our banquets, crowned our joys —
She should go home, where guests are waiting
She shuddered, mute; her lovely eyes
She sighs, she pines both day and night!
She sits with an untroubled air.
She sits with downcast head, too lax
She sought the path, but as she turned, 
She speaks to them as to old friends.
She stands, suffused with shy emotion.
She stifles here . . . her heart is sore.
She suffocates; she scarcely hears
She then, as love has power to do,
She thinks, uncertain, and goes on.
She thumbed her Martin till he knew
She too at length came forth, and nigh 
She trembles like a hunted fawn;
She waits: when will the answer come? 
She walks ahead. The old crone mutters:
She wanders with imagined lovers
She was affianced, but her mother
She was no beauty: that were fiction
She was not one of those who glories
She went. Onegin stood forsaken,
She whispered to herself: ’Tis he!
She will not find her meadows there.
She will not see him, the betrayer;
She would go stumbling down the road.
She would not win you by her face,
Shed rainbow lights across the snow
She’d watch its flight with anxious eye.
She’s at the window — always she! . . .
”She’s mine!” cries Eugene, stern and daring;
She’s wearing raspberry.” "Yes, you
Shorter and shorter grew the days;
Should cross her path while she was walking, 
Should giddy deity desire
Should howl absurdly: ^It is I!”
Should I not give the letter’s text 
Should see how lovely she has grown!
Show off their impudence, their vests.,
Show rapture or indifference,
Showed him so cold and calm a brow?
Shows passion’s volatility?
Shy as the doe who runs alone.
Simplicity to her young dream?
Since but a random education
Since infancy her only pleasure
Since Latin’s held not worth attention,
Since the dead days of Romulus.
Since time, without my interference,
Since you were christened? Gracious sakes!
Sing a song, a happy song.
Sing and bring a dashing lad
Singer of feasts and tender sorrow,
Sings of the Volga fishermen;
”Sit down, mon angeS ”My dear Cousine!'^
Sits down; the game is done — ^he goes;
Sits home, awaiting the reply;
Slapped servant-girls who were unpleasant;
Sleepless, Tatyana would converse 
Slight errors have a choice effect.
Slow eyes come last to rest upon 
So be it! Now my destiny
So be it; but I had to speak;
So countrified, a bit dejected,
So different, first they bored each other.
So easily, with passion seethed;
So elegantly can devise 
So exquisite as sacrifice;
So Eugene preached and Tanya listened,
So fortune-telling’s not for us.
So Heaven wills it. Your young soul 
So he returned, took Chatzky’s cue.
So pious are they, so precise.
So turning morning into night,
So Tanya bit by bit is learning
So to their destination straightway
^'So very early yesterday?”
Soft glance, nor welcome sweetly caroled.
Some are no more, as Saadi said.
Some charming spot to hold her still.
Some clue the index may afford her. 
Some dunce may yet pronounce as he 
Some fragment of his Northern art.
Some pages held a sharp incentive
’'Something detained him. He intended 
Something more certain to amuse.
Sometimes he reads to Olga, trying
Soon found a way to soothe her pain;
Soon the dry valleys will be blooming;
Soon, soon my soul will not remember: 
Sounding the cry that all was well;
Spoke of divorce in her despair.
SPEAK ILL OF MOSCOW! THERE’s YOUR TRAVELER!
Spring calls you to the verdant soil.
St. Preux, the rival of Wolmar,
Stands grim and grand, morosely priding
Stares out upon the shadowed lea:
Stay indoors, by a book befriended?
Steel files and combs of various guises,
Stifled, in solitude, unknown.
Still half asleep, nature is meeting
Stood like a threatening apparition;
’’Stop crying, stop this tiresome quacking 
Straight past the porter, like an arrow
Straight to the stranger Tanya speeds,
Strange faces mid the painted set.
Strange Jean Sbogar enchants her too.
STILL FOR EVER FARE THEE WELL.
Still clings to hope, though it be slender.
Stood thunderstruck. He could not stir.
Submissive through the grave’s dark portal. 
Such are the bard’s gratifications;
Such as the Muse alone can bring;
Such bliss is transient, if absurd;
Such faithful friendship as my hero’s
Such is the guerdon of your daring!
(Such is the sex, you will agree);
Such people with each day grow duller.
Such shoulders I have never known!
Such stuff as Lafontaine has written . . .
Such treachery who could forget?
Such vulgar scenes as these despising.
Suppose your pistol-shot has ended
Surly and languid as Childe Harold.
Surprise, asks: ''Where’s your second, pray?”
Surrendered his inheritance;
Surveying fallow land and plowed.
Suspicious age could do no less,
Sweet Lei now hovers o’er her head.
separately, with the following Foreword:
sion to reproaches and to gibes (which were, however, 
sudden. An observation betokening an experienced 
Say, from a bullet-wound? Or failing.
She hears and does not hear the closing
Shines the resplendent southern sun —
Shouts bravo in his sleep, and then
Smooth aria, the eager plea.
Some, honor’s victims, scarred by war,
Some, prey to piles, or Aphrodite;
Stanza //, Line 5. Ruslan and Ludmila: hero and
Stanza IX. In preparing the text for the press
Stanza L, Line 3. The beach: written at Odessa,
Stanza XI I ^ Line 10. Faublas: the rakish hero of a
Stanza XLII. This entire ironic stanza is nothing
Stanza XLIX, Line 6. The reference is to Byron.
Stanza XLVIII, Line 3. The bard: ^’An ecstatic
Stanza XV ^ Line 10. Bolivar: a black silk top hat,
Stanza XVI, Line 5. Talon: a well-known restau-
Stanza XVIIL Fonvizin and Knyazhnin were
Stanza XX, Line 8, Istomina: a celebrated bal-
Stanza XXI, Line 14- An instance of chilled senti-
Stanza XXIV, Line 11. To this passage Pushkin
Stanza XXV, Line 5. Chadayev (Chaadayev): the
Steep cliffs above the ocean’s purl,
Storm-giver Zeus decrees Odessa
Strange woes that left me broken-hearted . . .
Stuff that the Flemish school would draw.
Such feelings in this troubled heart,
Such is the news he’s eager for.
served by the family. (In time we expect to publish a 
service with the rank of General-in-Chief, and died in 
serving in Siberia. Empress Elizabeth, on ascending 
ship and the inclemency of the climate, he returned 
specious pretext. Wearied by the lack of companion- 
Stanza F, Line 9. A mason: freemason; the term
Stanza IX, Lines 7-8, Malek-Adhel: the hero of a
Stanza LVII^ Lines 9-10, The reference is to the
Stanza V, Line 3, Svetlana: the heroine of a ballad
Stanza X, Line 4, Julie: the heroine of La Nouvelle
Stanza XII, Lines 7-11, Melmoth: the reference is
Stanza XXIV, Lines 2-9, Among us, euphonious
Stanza XXIX, Line 8, The original refers ex-
Stanza XXVII, Line 4. In the original the Moscow
Stanza XXX. The reference is to Baratynsky, an
some misdemeanor, he was expelled from the Corps of 
Stanza III, Lines 5-7. See ”First Snow,” a poem
Stanza IX. The girl is supposed to see her future
Stanza L, Line 12. The reference is to August
Stanza VII, Lines 1-2. Here Pushkin is para-
Stanza VIII, Lines 9-14. The first song is an omen
Stanza XLII, Line 8. ^^This means,” observes one
Stanza XLIII, Line 10. Dominique de Pradt, a
Stanza XXX, Line 6. Tolstoy: F. P. Tolstoy, an
Stanza XXXI, Line 9. Yazykov: a lyricist of
Stanza XXXII. The reference is to Wilhelm
Stanza XXXIII, Line 5. Ivan Dmitriyev: a fabu-
stranger she accosts.
Stanza V, Line 13. The reference is to Very Freres,
Stanza X, Line 6. In Zhukovsky’s ballad, ^^Svet-
Stanza XL, Line 4. The reference is to Francesco
Stanza XV. This discarded stanza is extant in ms.,
Stanza XX, Line 14, Anton Delwig, a minor poet,
Stanza XX/JJ, Line 5. Malvine: a novel by Mme.
Stanza XXF, Line 13. Lepage: a famous gun-
Stanza XXI I ^ Line 13. With us, fortune -books are
Stanza XXVI ^ Lines 9-10. Buyanov: a character
Stanza XXVII, Line 8. The song is by Charles
Stanza XXXII, Line 11. Zizi: Yevpraxiya Wulf,
Stanza XXXVI, Line 8. See Note to Stanza XV,
smith. — Pushkin.
Stanza /F, Line 4. Levshin: author of many works
Stanza X/X, Lines 12-14, The statuette is of
Stanza XXI, Originally this stanza ended differ-
scription of Onegin’s ^^Album,” '^a note-book of rev- 
Stanza XXI I ^ Lines 6-14. It is believed that one
Stanza XXI Line 10, The reference is to Childe
Stanza XXX F, Line 8. A simile borrowed from
Stanza XXXFII. The Petrovsky Palace, just out-
side of Moscow, was the place where Napoleon found 
Stanza //, Line 3. The reference is to the examina-
Stanza /F, Line 7. Lenore: the heroine of Burger’s
Stanza X, Lines 1~2. The reference is to Onegin
Stanza X/, Lines 3-4. This is a veiled allusion to
Stanza X///, Line 13. Chatzky: a character in
Stanza X/F, Line 13. Shishkov: a vice-admiral
Stanza XF/, Line 10. Nina Voronskaya has been
Stanza XLIX^ Line 1. The reference is to a select
Stanza XX FJ, Line 4. Count Emmanuel St.
Stanza XXX F, Line 3. Chamfort: an eighteenth-
Stanza XXX F///, Line 12. Idol mio: the first
Stanzas I-V are romanticized autobiography.
skipper. "He is a man after my own heart,” Pushkin 
sky, a minor poet, who was living in Odessa at the 
stay in Odessa, Pushkin struck up an acquaintance 
"stc/ii” (or shchee) : a vegetable soup, usually made
So things went on beside the chilly
Soon brought us, if you please, to Paris,
'T cannot sleep, nurse; it is stifling!
Take off, and smoothly soar away.
Take what is offered of delight.
Talon’s Ms goal, no hesitating:
Tanya prepared for fortune- telling
Tanya with simple faith defended
Tanya, her silken belt untying,
Tanya, my dear, your looks distress me.”
Tanya, though she could give no reason,
Tanya’s the center of attraction.
Tatyana burned and shivered, asking:
Tatyana goes, impelled by love.
Tatyana had no doll at all
Tatyana hears the chorus sounding,
Tatyana in the court appears,
Tatyana leaps like nothing mortal 
Tatyana like a child surrenders 
Tatyana listened with vexation
Tatyana looked as though she heard 
Tatyana might be found romancing
Tatyana moans, and as she shivers
Tatyana read no Russian journal.
Tatyana sets the door ajar . . .
Tatyana stares in fascination,
Tatyana took her silent way
Tatyana trembled and grew red. 
Tatyana was her name then — granted.
Tatyana was her sister’s name:
Tatyana, and with failing breath.
Tatyana, breathless, caimot stir;
Tatyana, dear Tatyana! Weeping,
Tatyana, still an early riser,
Tatyana, terror-struck, is waking . . »
Tatyana, who spoke each one fair;
Tatyana’s
Tatyana’s bloom is all but faded;
Tatyana’s letter For days^ until another meeting.
Tatyana’s letter lies before me,
Tatyana’s letter Or but a tempter to undo me?
Tatyana’s match was ail the rumor;
Tatyana’s trouble; but each eye 
Tatyana’s — comes next Saturday.
Tell fortunes, too, but otherwise:
'^'^Tell me your dream,” all breathlessly
^Tfow dull-witted you are, nurse, truly!”
Than anything that I could do —
Than other men are doomed to feel:
Than that you sought, poor innocent. 
Than this: a household where the wife 
Than with a quite impartial pen 
That ancient glory still shines bright . ,
That ardent and most charming letter?
That could not very well be worse.
That day would soon be on the march.
That even thirteen-year-old misses
That fine parquet can never muster.
That have come down the years to us 
That he, when wheels were within hearing,
That here, for all the world to know it,
That huckleberry syrup will,
That Hymen brings, the grief and pain, 
That I am feeling far from strong; 
That I am not Onegin’s sort;
That I should meet you. God on High 
That I should see you once a week 
That man alone knows blessedness 
That miracles could be achieved.
That Ovid sang, that brought him here, 
That only once in a great while.
That poetry is their affair.
That poets feel, he lacked, nor knew 
That poets owe imto the Muse,
That silently you spoke to me.
That silly moon you see there looming.”
That teeth and nails may both be served.
That thrilled him in the days gone by,
That time and change may not erase.
That trembles with another’s passion; 
That we are driving in the dark.
That will not be ten times repeated
That you should scorn me, or ignore.
The Academic lexicon.
The album and the corset vanished,
The album of a country miss,
The baker’s German and precise.
The baker’s wicket opens out,
The ball’s wild gaiety was wearing.
The beau monde*s burdensome conventions
The beefsteak and the Strasbourg patty 
The billows covered them with kisses,
The billows, while the shrouds are rattling, 
The breath of life would then infuse.
The British Muse’s wild invention
The bench where the old nurse was seated 
The blithest dawn in sullen clouds.
The boredom: nabbing the unwary
The call of fame, for you forgot 
The carriage horses, chilled with waiting.
The charming and ingenuous maid
The charming lad was rather wild.
The cheerful morning sounds awaken;
The child while still at play prepares
The coachmen round the bonfires tramp.
The contemplative dryads played.
The cordial words: 'There was a poet!” 
The coughs, the shouts and hisses sounding.
The creatures fancy animated;
The creditors began to gather,
The crowd whose sparkle nothing dims,
The curtain rustles as it soars;
The Corsair or the Wandering Jew; 
The chance to read his modest songs 
The classic trumpet, sword, and mask; 
The company could see no harm
The country round about was still,
The country, and its dulness, bore you;
The cruel fates have surely not 
The customs that our elders knew.
The darkened mind is clear again; 
The darling object was provided
The day is done: he’s not replying,
The day my father gave his blessing;
The day was set, his heart elated;
The dead man buried, they were able
The drum is heard, the city’s rousing,
The eyes of the ingenuous young;
The English spleen it may resemble,
The errors are a trifle merely.
The fair ones, whom you were addressing 
The faithful one is soon affected:
The family is well; they send you
The fashion of a bygone day:
The fathers, indeed all, could see
The father’s simple words repeating.
The fear, the shame, are past endurance . . .
The fiery glance, he could but find
The fire is out; the ashes, shifting,
The first gay snowflakes spin once more
The first shy rays begin to gleam;
The floor is oak; two chests, a table,
The flower of life that blooms but once.
The folly of a simple girl:
The foreign tongue is native to
The friend of wintry cottage nights.
The friends, without delaying,
The frosts begin to snap, and gleaming
The frozen funds of intellection —
The furnishings are plain and stable.
The game he can at last forget;
The gentry all cried out in scorn,
The gifts the newcomer possessed;
The glory’s gone, I know not why;
The golden bubbles rising lightly
The good wdfe took her husband’s measure. 
The grandfathers it promptly urges.
The grove, the bridge, the lake, and on.
The guests are greeted with delight;
The heart of the confirmed coquette!
The hot fat cutlets; you would say 
The house rocks with applause; undaunted,
The Horse Guard’s spurs clank as he dances;
The hallowed letters O and E.
The happiness of youth must pass.
The happy man who took no chance
The haughty creatures may inspire
The hazy dawn commences coldly.
The heart once more with hope will glow.
The heart recalls its ancient scars,
The heart that thought its fires had dwindled
The heart with virgin tenderness?
The hearth breathes warmth, and all’s serene;
The hearts of both now spurned the flame
The herd no longer drives his cattle,
The hero we’re intent upon.
The hero’s named, the work’s begun;
The hope on which my heart is fed?
The hopeful youth was quick to find 
The horse who scents him snorts and quivers,
The hour called ^^entre chien et loup^^^
The house hummed like a hive of bees
The icy river shows a luster
(The image, why, of this and that:
The imps and cupids, quick as monkeys,
The kindly fates had fancied me.
The ladies’ little feet fly by.
The lady’s lasting admiration
The land that knew my love, my pain, 
The languors of a distant day.
The lazy Orient longer dozes.
The less we love her, sooth to say —
The letter shakes; she heaves a sigh;
The letter to you quite intact.
The letters that he wrote so neatly,
The letter’s ready to be sent;
The lifting mist reveals the pleasant
The lighted stage, and with a yawn 
The little feet and lovely limbs;
The lofty madcap! — but no matter:
The lofty passion, the pure pleasure
The lovelorn boy ignored them quite.
The lover’s language, the sweet vow,
The lustrous tea-cups, never spilling 
The magic of the bow obeying,
The married rakes, no longer naughty.
The meadows’ solitary look,
The merry and monotonous round.
The mind’s reflections coldly noted,
The most congenial of men.
The mountain maid, untamed, inspiring,
The Muse has come, and love departed,
The mansion j&rom its firm foundation
The mansion, hy a hill well hidden,
The marriage-broker kept on pressing
The master had no need to scold
The masters of the berry -crop.
The matchless bore — on these she mused; 
The matter for a fortnight; oh.
The maxims her mamma has taught.
^'The mind grows blunt as one grows old;
The moment that I saw you coming,
The mooB’s enchantment so obsessed her.
The moon her magic vigil kept.
The moon is fading with the night;
The moon, the lampion of heaven.
The mystic, wistful hours of night;
The nasal twang she also banished.
The neighbors promptly called and twaddled
The neighbors, pleasantly diverted,
The neighbors’ heads and tongues are wagging:
The newcomers but ape the old;
The nightingale’s keen melodies
The noble taste of bygone days.
The noses blown, and without pause.
The novelist had long since won;
The nurse replied: "God save you, daughter!”
The old gray nurse thinks she is napping
The old man had no time to look
The orchestra’s already drooping;
The other slowly circles, thus,
The pail is brought, the ice is clinking
The painful dream forever broken!
The pair of us had planned to wander,
The passions, though, concerned more often
The pattern of a paragon.
The peddler plods, the merchant dresses,
The pen makes mock of such as he.
The perishable human crop.
The phrasing, awkward or mistaken,
The placid course of rustic leisure;
The plan I had no pains to settle,
The plans to have been consummated,
The pleasures relished, triumphs thwarted;
The poet in his exaltation
The poet’s ardent speech, the mind
The poet’s earliest elation
The press is thick, the hubbub loud.
The prisoned girls of the Salgir,
The profile that a move will blur
The promise of her spring was blighted,
The purling of a gentle brook;
The race of men recks nothing, save
The reason doesn’t really matter.)
The rings that the new mode dictated.
The room where the old man berated
The same consuming agony.
The samovar, that blest invention,
The saucers of preserve about.
The science of the tender passion
The secret shame with which I burned^
The secrets of the nuptial bed;
The senses soon grew blunt and dull.
The servants gave him all assistance,
The sex, of course, is light as do’^m.
The shadows creep across the sill.
The shepherd’s horn awakes the peasant;
The shutters open; chimneys spout;
The sight of them produces spleen.
The sign with shaking hand, she prayed.
The silent fields, abandoned, wait,
The silent stars, the brooding moon —
The sky breathed autumn, somber, shrouded;
The sly thrall struggle to be free.
The soul so shy of happiness;
The sound of Russian when correct;
The spirit of an oddish dreamer.
The splendid mansion shines and gleams, 
The stalls are seething, the pit roars,
The state relied, his friends were told. 
The storms which shook it like a leaf
The stove with colored tiles, appealing
The strains of Albion’s proud lyre 
The strait-laced innocent beguile 
The street-lamps’ pallid substitute.
The subject of an argmnent?
The sudden soimd of hoofs! . . . She freezes.
The table shone with wax; they handed
The talk would turn with strange persistence
The tender verse. Princess Pauline;
The theatre’s full, the boxes glitter,
The theatre’s wicked legislator.
The theme from which he ne’er departed
The things that I concoct in lonely
The third day interest abated
The time came when he quite abhorred
The time had come — she was in love.
The tongue of Petrarch and of love.
The trace you left has long since perished
The traveler observes and shivers 
The tw"o explore the garden’s charm.
The unconcerned beloved anew.
The village, where Onegin’s leisure
The vintage of the comet flows.
The Vampire wrecks her sleep at night;
The vapor wreathes the china pot.
The version of it given here 
The whole day through in solitude.
The will to rule is seen thus early:
The wind, would enter, gently warning
The wolf beside his hungry mate.
The woods, Tatyana stayed at home,
The words again with stifled moan.
The younger beauties will declare
The youth was called on every hand
Their endlessly protracted caU.
Their freezing glances framed to hurt you.
Their judgment both men freely gave.
Their looks enchant, their words are sweet, 
Their love, though tempests fill the air.
Their marriage was a certainty.
Their masters wearily berating.
Their meetings passed; in turn they spoke
Their pangs, and he, remote from love,
Their rapid bubbles hissing still;
Their voices, and their words were kind, 
Them both aside and only for a 
Themselves to find out his intent.
”Then bid your grandson — don’t delay it —
Then dipped into some vile review.
Then disappointed beyond measure, 
Then fell again to talking of
Then flash with pride and flame with anger, 
Then he came up to her and said: 
Then liking grew: they met each day
Then Olga’s suitor paid a visit.
Then plunged into domestic labors:
Then wafted as by Eolus
Then what a poem I’ll contrive 
Then you will weep, but who supposes
Then, in the flower of his youth?
Theocritus and Homer bored him ;
There at her feet, as they would do.
There bold Fonvizin, freedom’s friend,
There is a roaring in her ears . . .
There is no calumny so deep.
There is no notion so erratic.
There is no sparkle here of wit;
There may the lyre sound clear and free,
There one can make a declaration,
There Shakovskoy brought noisy laughter
There was a time when the impassioned
There was a time when the portrayal
Thereby our eighteen-year -old sage.
Therewith a bottle of light wine,
These artless lines can never bore me.
"These evenings? At the Larins’.” "Splendid.
These friends! ’tw^as not for nothing that 
These many years, to me, or you.
'^These poets! What! another visit?”
These warnings in your ears are dinned 
They are so clever, so serene.
They came into my mind so pat.
They climg as brother clings to brother.
They dared not let their voices drop:
They gossiped on, in high good humor.
They like to fill a man with fear.
They liked to tread a country measure;
They loosed my braids, and singing low
They loved the good old ways, and wallowed
They married her sans her consent.
They met; except that both were human.
They only sent him off to sleep.
They say that life does not afford
They say the ladies should read Russian,
They settled dowm on his estate.
They sought to make love’s ties more binding 
They still can thrill me in my dreams.
They too were of their duties heedful,
They took communion twice a year;
They touch the springs of reverie.
They travel homeward quickly, choosing.
They were unlike as any two men:
They whisper: ^’Dimya, pay attention!”
They’d sup, then time for sleep drew nigh.
They’re duller than the things we write.
Thinking of Eugene all the while.
This estimable friend embracing.
This ever -rapturous hero, burning
This insult was not to be borne.
This is no rhetoric I’m using:
”This silly landscape! Never mind;
This subject filled his conversations.
Those lovely lips; is it not true?
Though Eugene lent a willing ear.
Though he pursued, the chase was palling; 
Though innocent, are quite absurd.
Though it is true your recollection 
Though it suggests a peasant’s hovel,
Though I was worthy your belief,
Though now a light of no repute.
Though there are people, most malicious,
Thought sermons fashioned to annoy;
Thoughts of the future made him whistle;
Three ladies mention a soiree.
Three pairs of truly pretty feet.
Through empty day and idle night:
Through silent woods, and she discovers 
Through the dim room where I am sitting.
Thus a gray hare will quake with fright 
Thus a poor moth imprisoned seeks
Thus darkly drives the storm that shrouds 
Thus Eugene thought with melancholy.
Thus grows a seed the earth has hidden 
Thus Lensky his good Mend defended.
Thus once again he manifested
Thus people, frankly I confess,
Thus to rush forth, then lapse in quiet
Thus you, Yazykov, when affection
Thus, for an evening game of whist,
THOU, MY SWEET SVETLANA.
Than halt bewildered on the shore.
Than in the north Aurora’s blushes.
Than is the moon one sees at dawn;
That argues a resourceful poet,
That poor Tatyana was upset.
That year was extraordinary.
The aged, at the grave’s grim portal.
The autumn seemed so loth to go;
The bear is marching at her heels.
The bear says: '^Here my gossip dwells.
The blow of a malignant fate.
The bold hihitka swiftly traces
The bony hands, the sly grimaces;
The chairs shoved backward scrape the flooring;
The chilly dark the girl is sharing
The colonel’s sending it. A ball!
The company commander, whom 
The couples to the table swarm;
The courtyard white, a white parterre,
The creature bellows in reply 
The crooked trunks, the gleaming claw^s.
The crowd of house-sprites, blowing out 
The crunch of snow . , « a step approaches;
The dawn shines ruddy; Olga rushes 
The door swings wide, and Lensky’s here,
The dreaded one, the dearly prized:
The dream alarms her, and not knowing
The dream pervades her mournful moods.
The driver on his box we note
The feast goes on, but soon thereafter
The feast he was quite unprepared for, 
The feast makes every move a labor.
The frightened maiden gathers strength
The frost-work o’er the panes was twining;
The gamblers, worthy men and bold:
The gathering, affected by it
The girls, off by themselves, conspire;
The glories of these frosty days.
The guests are early in arriving.
The hall is packed to suffocation,
The helpless girl can do no more
The hoar-frost in the sun a -shimmer.
The horns and hoofs, the whiskered faces,
The hostess cries. Guests squeeze together,
The idol of all maids in bloom.
The image trembling in the glass
The joys they knew have all proved mortal.
The ladies sit beside the fire;
The lights, bewildering the rout;
The maiden lies there, pale as death.
The maids would gleefully foretell 
The name-day feast is soon begun.
The noise is queer and terrifying.
The old fat counsellor, Flyanov,
The parlor’s crowded; barking pugs,
The people’s lore of days gone by;
The pines, their boughs on every hand 
The poor girl stands there, almost senseless;
The poor thing nearly swoons; she’s ill.
The quarrel grows; Onegin quickly
The rapids and the underbrush
The rings are plucked; each maiden, sighing, 
The road is lost and past divining.
The roofs, the fence, all molded fair;
The room grows loud with talk and laughter, 
The rosy dawn brings forth the sun,
The shaggy monster seizes her,
The snow is reaching to her knee;
The snows still gleaming softly pink,
The tails and tusks and bloody jaws.
The touching glasses chime and clink.
The trees in wintry silver gleamed;
The tune, however, threatens her;
The two friends’ greetings; and the tears 
The two Skotinins, gray as sages.
The verses came — but who would know it? —
The very hero of our novel!
The waters, where they boil and toss;
The wit Triquet, late of Tambov.
The young tell fortimes, all are jolly.
Then buzzing, all sit down to dine.
Then he presents the madrigal.
’^There peasants, rich beyond all measure.
There’s gloom and darkness all about;
There’s little here that’s exquisite.
These guests, and somehow keeps her seat.
They bark and whistle, sing and screech. 
They chew. The pleasant prandial chink
They chortle, argue, shout and squeak.
They cross themselves, their heads incline,
They face Tatyana, who is paler
They set a table laid for two;
They vanish, claimed by the unknown;
This ditty sounds for Tanya’s ring:
This learned opus one fine day 
This Martin Zadeka, it seems,
Though great, the poet’s not conceited.
Three-fifty was the price bespoken,
Through lofty tree-tops everywhere;
Through spectacles, with failing eyes,
Till from his dressing-room he’d pass.
Till Lensky, too absorbed to look,
Till somehow the long evening’s ended,
Time was when she would be composing
’Tis here, to please a lavish whim,
’Tis morning; all the world’s astir:
’Tis thus the gay dog’s thoughts are freighted,
’Tis time to loose me from my tether;
’Tis time to seek the southern surges
'Tn all the jealous crowd, what she
To -write in French . , . What’s to be done? 
To a toilette you must admire,
To an ambitious author’s whims:
To be his relative’s sole heir.
To be united to his own,
To brush the shy lips of a maiden 
To call that friend of freedom wrong.
To darkness’ kind abode repairing,
To do full justice to the table,
To drown the jealous whispering.
To find a Moscow magazine
To flowery field and village sport,
To fondle either parent never
To friend and child and faithful wife;
To gossip to about the city
To gossip; but her heart would fill 
To hang upon the young bloods’ tales.
To her dear hero she addresses.
To his estate about this time 
To his sharp judgments, sullen wit.
To keep his hopeless ledgers clear.
To kiss the breast with languor laden;
To know Onegin really well.
To learn my Eugene’s air of scorn.
To love and idleness devoted.
To make a guest exclaim at it.
To masquerade in male attire.
To move you even while you slept;
To no one, friends, you must believe me:
To one who is but half-alive:
To overhear what they may say.
To play with tender reveries.
To poetry’s exalted flame;
To praise the dancer now the rage,
To prink and preen he’d ask no urging,
To promenade, as all do daily.
To roam the forests, green and deep.
To save his honor stood quite ready 
To see a pedant in a bonnet!
To sit beside an invalid!
To sketch a woman’s legs or head.
To stormy gaiety a traitor,
To suffer prison, and would fly 
To tag each other, or to roam 
To talk and sigh, to jest or grieve
To tempt the sporting man of fashion.
To this half-Russian, German-bred.
To this were fribbling hours devoted,
To wander by the lake at leisure,
To which we vowed our walks apart,
To which, God help me, I belong.
To whom your pensive verse belong?”
Together in the forest gloaming;
Touched by the careless twittering,
TO ONEGIN
To give me over to despair.
To mourn his absence, and in vain.
To praises imaccustomed grown.
TO ONEGIN But you^re unsociable, they say.
To stand, dear vision, by my bed?
TO ONEGIN Dispel my doubts! My mind^s awhirl;
To 0 . . . our neighbor. Oh, but he
To choose such moral tales as might 
To come today, and without fail.
To decent folk, and with a smile.
To disavow- it now-. I read
To drink a toast to his fair neighbor,
To dwell on sorry things so long.
To face our foes as all men must,
To free its wings, and frantic, pushes
To get it, friends, do you recall?
To grasp things . . . But you’re growing pale;
To have your humble servant tell
To her to whom his heart belongs,
To his dear charmer his own verses?
To holding poets’ sweet inventions.
To horse’s stamp and human speech!
To my old nurse, my childhood’s friend;
To scratch her neck, and stubbornly
To take the letter up and seal it 
To the young ladies what was fated.
To wash his face with careful paw,
Torment the rhymesters a la mode.
Travels how different a road —
Triquet turns, with his sheet, to her,
Tufted with snow; the stars are shining 
’Twas early he learned how to flutter
’Twas in a word the Russian blues.
’Twas not the sort of thing he cared for; 
’Twas thus I sang them — both were dear.
Two days he found it quite diverting:
Two fluffy furrows as it races;
Two hearts, a torch, and flowers, be sure, 
Two minutes passed with neither speaking,
Two Petriads, and a collection
Two slender boughs are flung across
Two-legged millions are our tools;
txxviii
'T am not known here. He is gone . . .
Take rest, young poet, as thy wage.”
Tanya surveys it with a start.
Tatyana cannot stop her tears.
Tatyana scanned them without fail.
Tatyana should be settled, too.
Tatyana thrills with pain and pleasure
Tatyana watched them drive away 
Tatyana, dreaming, walked alone.
Tatyana, spell-bound, lingers still.
Tatyana’s solitude adds fuel
That at Very’s on credit he 
That burdened my Tatyana’s heart! 
That by a sudden storm was drenched;
That ladies’ feet have had for me.
That morning, gay and debonair.
That natiure’s season of renewal 
That no hope of renewal cheers?
That one be potted anyhow,
That shows a statuette of iron:
That to such matters Homer pays.
That waters well the nearby valley.
That’s where the eligibles are!”
The afternoon of life is starting,
The arms are crossed — a well-known pose —
The ball had pierced clean through the breast.
The ball-room summons one and all.
The bank; one hears a gentle spring;
The bearded old postilion’s mounted —
The bed-curtains; awake completely,
The bee deserts her waxen cell
The bud that just begins to blow.
The bullets are crammed down already;
The cattle low; the nightingale
The children learn their A-B-C.
The clouds before him — can it be?
The comrade upon whom she doted.
The cost of post-horses, was glad 
The country to the past is tender.
The couple stood, to say good-bye.
The crowd, the hubbub, and the glitter!
The dale is dark and vapor-ridden.
The day of busy cares is blessed.
The day to come, what is it bearing?
The day upon which they intended
The dining-room: on chairs they slumber. 
The dogs attack her, all but biting
The dread of vice, the fear of shame.
The end of the mazurka, and 
The enemies their mantles doff.
The exile from society
The fair young pilgrim must go home.
The fatal hour is past recall;
The fields with droplets once again), 
The fierce flames reddening the skies.
”The fireplace, miss, please look at it — 
The foes stood by, with downcast eyes.
The foes! How long had they been parted
The frozen corpse Zaretzky places.
The girls with Olga and Tatyana
The goal is there before them. Blazing
The grove’s asleep. The wind blows chill.
The hammers on the ramrods knock;
The hat is cocked, the brow morose.
The haughty portrait of Lord Byron,
The heavens glow with azure light.
The highroad, leveled altogether,
The horses scent the dead, and foam
The horses to an oak near by.
The hour for waking and for sleeping;
The housekeeper a slow good-bye;
The jagged flint still harmless, lifted.
The ladies enter; now it’s gliding 
The lady of the house: she’s fled —
The law of Fate is ever just.
The leaps, the heels, the whiskers fair. 
The lily -stem, and withers so
The loads on the kibitkas sway.
The local Paris: Petushkov,
The messenger was not kept waiting:
The modern Russian’s worst disease.
The music, he would whisper low 
The Muse — to marriage been converted.
The maids and coachmen vie in swearing; 
^'The manor-house,” says Tanya, shyly,
The menu hangs there, in plain sight.
The mother fell to figuring
The mother groans. "It drives me wild;
The naked woods surprise the sight,
The neighbor now declares: ''He’s killed.”
The news gives Tanya little pleasure.
The nightingale, this season’s lover,
The north wind breathes and bellows, driving
The nurse alone might well have guessed,
The olden sorrows I regret.
The passer-by may read it clear:
The pencil-marks he made with care
The pile of books no longer read,
The pistols gleam, held straight and steady;
The poet did not think of stopping
The poet in the very dawn
The poet is no more ... his lot
The poet lets his pistol fall.
The poet, and he may, forsooth,
The poet, and the world will follow 
The poet, swift in thought and action,
The poet, with impatience burning.
The poisonous vUe worm that mumbles
The poor old lady, broken-hearted.
"The ray of dawn will shine tomorrow,
The river and its banks are leveled;
The rogue, who somehow would escape 
The room, though not without a sigh.
The rustic cyclop labors, daft,
The ruts and ditches that abound
The servants gather at the gates 
The shades of night are growing thinner.
The shutters closed, the windows blear
The simple lines there graven, she 
The sledge awaits. He does not tarry:
The smart coquettes’ smart enemy,
The steward came here when requested;
The storm and strife, the frequent feast; 
The stranger. At her frightened cry,
The sun appears, a brief snow-flurry
The tea. I note the hour, or nearly,
The tender feelings and the brave?
The tender leaves, but in the spring 
The tender torments, and the sadness, 
The terraced scene, the view unfolding 
The thing that makes the world go round.
The thirst for knowledge, toil, and fame.
The thoughts of youth so high and grave.
The three kibitkas customary
The time of tempting nights approaches,
The time run on, and in the middle
The times improve, and better us!
The truth, and, God be praised, can see 
The view into the moonlit night.
The voice of mistress, foe, and friend,
The volumes at long last succeeding 
The while we hear the woodland sing?
The while Zaretzky with a sneer
The whist -players are Hon-hearted:
The window, where he read it through.
The women mowing oft repair
The world of glory thus bereaving,
The world without, Tatyana crept.
The years to rugged prose constrain me.
The year’s bright dawn with gentle greeting.
The young Othello is delighted!
The youthful heart; I will defy
Their arms about each other, creep 
Their gestmes marked by firm decision,
Their mark the temple or the thigh.
Their steaming cups have barely stirred 
Then at the rug that decks the bed,
Then he suggests they sit one out.
Then let each man be on his mettle:
Then, aiming at his pallid brow.
Then, hurry, hurry to the fields!
There are no inns. In a cold cottage
There is no sleep for such as she.
There is the spot if you would know it:
There pours in torrents from his pen 
There sings all night; wild roses cover
There the Petrovsky Palace, hiding
There, when the tardy moon was shining. 
These proud reflections all portend:
They chase the dogs away, alert
They come. Quite unaffected still.
They gallop snorting o’er the snow.
They had to travel for a week.
They hitch them to the master’s sleigh; 
They look like fenceposts, flashing by.
They stop because the servants fetch 
They’ll cock the trigger and let fly,
They’ve played eight rubbers at a stretch.
Thirty -two paces with precision;
This clever jester had to suffer.
This pool we bathe in, friends, this muck 
This strange and sorry character,
This too was the old master’s nook;
Those gentle hands were stained with gore
Though he was brave, though he was gifted,
Though on occasion hke a duffer
Thus brilliantly begins the ball.
Time was when all the world was vying
’Tis pleasant with a wicked sally
’Tis yet more pleasant if the creature
To ask Anisya for the key.
To Eugene, who at once goes dancing 
To earn a luncheon from the two,
To flute and viol’s merry sound.
To gather tribute from the dell.
To go: he had no wish to stay.
To have our roads completely mended, 
To have two friends at daggers drawn 
To hear a people’s hymn of praise.
To her a tiresome thing she dreamed. 
To her vain passion day by day;
To hold the pistol straight and steady;
To Lensky’s wrath: he would not see
To leave such quiet haunts as these 
To leave, is gone; they let time slip 
To let the worldlings take the measure
To make a man feel like an ass,
To make his noble coflSn ready:
To make the soul of man rejoice 
To me alone he dedicated! . . .’?
To method, he would not allow 
To mist her wide and tender eyes.
To Moscow: it’s the brides’ bazaar;
To Olga. First they spin about.
To Olga: "I am happy— no?”
To one whose soul has perished, and 
To Olga’s voice: away she went,
To play a game of cards with me,
To plunge their tinkling pitchers there,
To praise his mind if not his heart,
To reading, where a finger-nail 
To rest from loads I used to bear.
To rest the nags: the halts were boring. 
To say, with sorrow in her eyes:
To soil the sheets with flying quill;
To sunny gardens’ fragrant toil;
To take aim also — ^but just then 
To take the awful cargo home.
To tempt with tender word and sigh
To tender him the Kremlin keys.
To the low grave, to sit and weep.
To the low roof to fetch her measure 
To think the girl that he adored
To use her own, and hence they had 
To win her — showed her such attention! 
”Too late,” he thinks. ”And then that vicious
Took punishment once in a way.
Triquet; next follow two adepts:
Tug at the leather rein, and turning
’Twas here the master used to sit.
’Twixt the maid’s attic and the entry. 
Two girls would come, and sadly twining 
Two hearts, one may perhaps believe.
tXXVlll On with the journey and the story!
Tatyana cannot but be grateful
Tatyana’s brilliant catch discerning,
Term vulgar. To my great dismay,
That he must have a change of scene
That only mediocrity 
That our bright pristine hopes grew battered,
That she should offer a narration 
That she’s ideal — he must jot 
That youth was given us in vain,
The aunts, of one thing only thinking.
The balcony where such a press is,
The call to early labors dinning;
The cold pretensions to success.
The columns of the city gate
The country life, the rustic hovels.
The couples as they whirl aw*ay,
The dazzling capital, forgot —
The eyeglass of the connoisseur.
The feasts where wealth and wit were squandered,
The few who relish toil and teen).
The fields’ and forests’ solitude
The flash of wit, the flouncing dress.
The gallants for their hostess vying.
The general, since such tributes flatter 
The girl, stands rooted to the spot*
The girlish secrets of the heart,
The glitter of the noisy press.
The gossips ever are malicious,
The hours go by: they do not waken;
The ladies all pressed closer to her;
The ladies, each a picture when
The language of the gods rejected . . .
The little tricks that are affected
The lively Muse was at my side
The lonely thicket where a stream
The lovely ladies’ filmy dresses.
The Moscow belies are many, too.
The Muse first shone before my eyes.
The Nereids’ low murmuring.
^'The other . . . But we’ve time tomorrow,
The parlor hums with conversation,
The princess, and her feeble cries 
The proud lorgnettes the ladies hold
The relatives — and there are dozens —
The rooms are thronged and hot and gay.
The secret she will never mention,
The simple talk flows readily.
The sounding waves’ eternal chorus,
The source of tears and happiness.
The stars of night are fair and many,
The subject, give me your attention:
The throng with a mute eye commanding?
The treasure none can ever guess,
The two old women weep, embrace.
The well-known clubman, who, God bless us, 
The while she howls both long and loud;
The word is one I can’t translate:
The world, the ball, are both forgot,
The young and hopeful brides-to-be,
Their conquests and their pranks with glee;
Their daughters, after due embraces.
Their monocles that rake the guests.
Their nags, huts, mansions, monasteries,
Their news, their gossip — all arc stale.
Their very slander has no color;
Then all is changed. For lo! she veers,
Then they demand in compensation
^^Then why upbraid him thus severely?
There is a dinner-party daily
There, wistful-eyed, behold her stand,
They come, they conquer, and they flee.
They do not change, depend upon it.
They eye our heroine askance.
They find her odd — so unaffected.
They take her to the Club for dances.
They traveled, but a dull hour passed 
They waltz, they bow, they curtsey, flitting
They’d come to an old aunt, now failing —
Thither she came to sport and sing
Thou epic Muse! Upon my way
Thus far away her thoughts are flying;
Thus he grew restless and decided
Till travel, as you’ll have inferred,
To a new pose will he be goaded,
To classicism doffed my hat:
To hear the vulgar chatter there.
To him of whom indeed I sing . . •
To join the hateful worldly flurry.
To the kind invalid, and yet 
To travel, you must be desiring 
To utter, yet she’d not a trace.
To watch the swans in some dim valley 
To whom these faces all appear
Together nudge Tatyana and
^Took quickly to the left.” But balking.
Took wilful passion for my guide;
that is news — couldn’t be better!
Tatyana fills his every thought;
Tatyana is alone; but making 
Tatyana shows no sign of caring
Tatyana’s husband is appearing.
That bodes full flowers and honeyed fruit. 
That does not frighten anyone
That I had stained my reputation — 
That little girl ... is it a dream?
That little girl he did not deem
That my performance is infernal,
That scarce had heard of his existence, 
That the first strophes should be read 
That write he must, and in this fashion — 
The ballroom’s ruler, scarcely human.
The blood that burns tmth frantic fire;
The boa on her shoulders, and 
The days speed by; before you know it
The dolts that must be tolerated.
The double windows, the snug fire;
The faces one meets everywhere;
The fine keen wit of yesteryear 
The first clear picture is disclosing
The guests, arriving, hear their laughter. 
The guests’ sly glances were enough.
The hours allotted me by Fate,
The husband enters: the appalling
The last chapter of Eugene Onegin was published
The lies that journals perpetrate,
The lonely gloom was hard to bear.
The loss of it I could not bear.
The magazines that like to scold
The man? Or vanity, forsooth?
'^The omitted stanzas have repeatedly given occa-
The page he read could scarcely bore him.
The plain girl’s love? Why, even now,
The polite ”yes” that is behooving.
The poor shy girl whose adoration
The pranks and jokes of former years.
The prince invites him to be present 
The princess, pale, in neglige.
The prince’s comrade and relation 
The queen, aloof, remote, imperious.
The rain of passion is not cruel.
The scene where first I saw your face,
The silence at long last is broken
The simple girl whose dreams, whose ways.
The sleepless fellow’s heart and head.
The spot itself was God-forsaken.
The talk is seasoned well thereafter 
The tinsel of unwelcome days,
The tone the gentlemen employed,
The tread of passion augurs tears:
The truest source of inspiration:
The very boon they would petition,
The very words Onegin wrote.
The vista of a free romance!
The war, the snow-fall, and his mate.
The way a Russian verse is turned.
The world would gain if it should learn 
The world’s oblivious animation.
The wretched story out, complete —
''Then I was younger, maybe better,
Then, at a party he attends
"Then, far from Moscow’s noise and glitter.
Then, with a look that showed her tiring,
There is a quickening at the root
There is no answer to his letter;
These spoke to her with silent force.
These were the secret fond traditions
This giddy play in fancy-dress.
Though once they praised my magic pen:
Thus autumn gusts deal death and treason.
Thus sunk in reveries, he nearly
To answer when the lady speaks.
To him; and thereby sadly daunted, 
To hurry them: he cannot wait.
To leave . . . Our Eugene could not stir.
To love all ages owe submission;
To meet his fathers speedily;
To note how little she is stirred;
To Tanya of the days that were;
To youthful hearts its tempests bring
Toward the moon her languid gaze,
TO TATYANA
To follow you with deep devotion;
To know you: spirit tuned to spirit;
To let the tender habit seize me;
To listen to you, late and soon;
TO TATYANA Already your reproach I hear.
To earn a smile, a dream, a tear.
To hapless Tanya . . . Well, and so 
To hear a voice cry: ^'Well? He’s killed.” 
To his Tatyana makes his way.
To long to clasp your knees, and, throbbing
To me all this is naught. This minute
'^To me, Onegin, all these splendors.
To these long letters and these tears.
Today it is my turn to speak.
Together we have traveled far.
Turn pale or blush, as one distressed . . .
Tutored by her own wit — she duly 
’Twould give you in society 
that he had left out of his novel an entire chapter, 
the last chapter of Eugene Onegin 'eight’ instead of 
’Tis time: my pen wants rest from driving:
transition from Tatyana, the provincial miss, to 
Tatyana, the society lady, is unexplained and too 
tant to him, not to the public. Some fragments of it 
That riots through the mountain passes;
3 The background, and Mashuk, the vernal.
The Hindu — diamonds in his coffer;
The insults time heaps on her head 
The Kalmucks’ flocks, contented, graze. 
The landed gentleman has brought 
The old assessor, paralytic?
The sharks who feed on gamblers’ passions
The weak would mend life’s fraying thread;
There a Circassian’s horse goes flying;
Thinks sadly: ''Why am I not ailing.
THEN ONEGIN VISITS TAURIS:
That forms the ducklings’ paradise.
That’s fine, but if the truth were told.
The box, where, regnant in her splendor.
The cab, to spare the feeble nag.
The child of shrewdness and of daring,
The city breathes of Europe; hotly.
The city soon will wear resounding
The dedication is addressed to Pyotr Alexandro-
The editor has followed closely the text of the first
The fearful bill, unheeded, mounts.
The flying hours no one counts.
The golden tongue Italians speak;
The harbor is a busy sight;
The jesting mixed with flattery . . .
The languor and the flame of love 
1 6 The load of oysters they were getting
The loud finale sounds, and pushing,
The marker on the balcony
The masses of your mountains gleamed,
The merchant, to the port is faring 
The merchant’s wife, so young and slender. 
The moon has risen; in a light 
The opera summons — in a word,
The other day in rainy weather
The ox with lowered horns must drag
The oysters? They have come! In rapture
1 7 The Orpheus to whom Europe hearkens.
The prima donna? The ballet?
The sea, the southern sun for basking . . .
The square grows lively now and dizzy
The vision of a peerless girl,
Then I required, as I protested,
5 There Mithridates sought his end.
They glow, they burn, the ecstasies
They learned, and we, before we leave.
They rouse are those of youthful kisses, 
Thick coffee Orientals prize:
Those fleshy anchorites alive 
To call it dirty is no lie.
To cast forced shade upon the street.
To crowding slaves on every side?
To liken do-re-mi to wine.
To merchants; we have but one fear:
To scan the flags and see what sails 
To the inviting sea would fly.
Towers above the craggy hills,
Town that’s delivered to the flood,
Transparent veil the sky is muffled.
Truly, a beatific land.
Tumansky in sonorous stanzas
Two merchants have already met.
the Russian ambassador to France is supposed to 
^“^the Russian Racine.” Semyonova, an actress who 
the shores of Africa and taken to Constantinople. 
tivated Mme. de Sta9. — Pushkin.
twenties of the century.
The Russian envoy rescued him and sent hi m as a 
the age of Catherine (he died in 1800). — Pushkin.
the remembrance of remarkable men soon vanishes, 
the throne, showered him with favors. He retired from 
to Maturin’s Melmoth, the Wanderer; Jean Sbogar: a 
to Petersburg without leave and went straight to his 
Tatyana does, expecting that the mirror will reflect 
The tom-cat calls the tabby
To sleep upon the stove.
the image of her future husband as his spirit takes a 
the sizes of our waists and found them to be identical. 
Than face them; he who has gone through it
This way is of all fates the worst.
the author’s friends among the exiled or executed 
the poet’s slovenly appearance.
the story goes that Orestes and Pylades, having 
tion at the Lyceum when Pushkin, as a boy of sixteen, 
to save the other.
to which of them should be the victim, each striving 
’^"There Mithridates sought his end”: when Push-
the Crimea, erected by him in memory of a captive 
time of Pushkin’s enforced stay there.
told a friend; "who knows, perhaps my grandfather 
The czar caroused with zest, but mark!
The family would meet and talk,
The friend of Bacchus, Mars, and Venus,
The lame Turgenev for his nation
The men who’d set the peasants free.
The mighty Peter in his youth;
The story of these fragmentary stanzas,
The State for long; the course of things 
The sad Yakushkin, it would seem,
The science of revolt was slow
The very plains where Wittgenstein
The winter, Barclay, Russia’s God?
Then muttered on in ecstasy.
Then Russia did as she was bidden.
There Muravyov showed pluck and force,
There other things were done and bruited.
There Pestel ... for the tyrants . . .
There the impassive general
They had their private meetings, whether
This horseman the Pope consecrated,
This warlike rover who was fated
This whiskered regiment diverted
To his assassins without ruth.
To humble kings and make them fawn.
To make a lasting deep impression.
Tulchin, where the Spring shines betimes. 
Upon the chapters in your hand, 
uncle always was respected;
U pon your honor I depend.
Unbidden guests; the scene abashes 
Undressed at last and went to bed.
Unheeded in her great dark eyes.
Unhesitatingly she ran.
Unknown to butterfly and bee.
Unless indeed we send a card
Unspoiled by the vain show and fleeting
Until a great discovery
Until Breguet’s unsleeping chime
Until the flames blazed up anew
Until, near dawn, his head was dropping 
Unutterably dear and fair.
Up through the flue the pipe -smoke passes; 
Up to its roof was past all praise. 
Up to the steps, in coach and shay, 
Upon ''ideal” — modish word —
Upon a fair Venetian face,
Upon a succulent fat pie
Upon a trailing branch suspended
Upon each other’s necks they fall.
Upon her balcony alone
Upon her heart, as though a rumbling 
Upon her shamed and flaming cheeks;
Upon her tray a steaming cup:
Upon her wrath her lips are sealed.
Upon his brow the mark of death,
Upon his sledge tries out the road;
Upon its staples, not on gold —
Upon my dreaming soul intrude.
Upon the azure, pale and tender.
Upon the bachelor’s sad existence;
Upon the boards still flutter free,
Upon the couch, a riding-crop.
Upon the dam leaned Lensky, waiting.
Upon the death of his dear father
Upon the distant hills lay light.
Upon the dull mind’s slumbers break.
Upon the finished product then;
Upon the floor Triquet we view 
Upon the good old-fashioned ways 
Upon the granite parapet.
Upon the magic of that stream —
Upon the nameless river’s shore
Upon the oak her tufts are hung;
Upon the pages everywhere 
Upon the parlor sofa lies
Upon the patriarchal dust,
Upon the sharp -clawed paw he offers,
Upon the stove the cat elected
Upon the streets the snow is lying,
Upon the table gleam the glasses,
Upon the table, piping hot;
Upon the third of January,
Upon the threshold of his grave.
Upon the urn, and think: Til -fated!
Upon those lines of bis commending 
Upon those very boards thereafter.
Upon voluptuous rugs instead.
Upon whose brows methought was hell’s 
Upon Zarema? To the same 
Us all, and where I now am told 
unquestionably among the most distinguished men of 
Upon the banks by Dnieper raided,
Upon the steppes that it invaded,
V Hence oft he had his stallion saddled
V Is like the poet’s maid, Svetlana,
V With us, to miss a reputation
VI And one and all of them exerted
VI Of Juvenal he could make mention.
VI Was also picked to pieces duly,
Vladimir Lensky, handsome, youthful,
Vladimir made a dry response 
Vli Trochaic from iambic measure,
Vll With equal warmth a comrade’s greeting
Vlll And day by day in pensive yearning
Vlll And I am not exaggerating
vil With a strange, secret exultation;
VVll Alas, in dreams, asleep or waking,
vii She stoops, she falls, her struggling ceases;
viii Of holding forth with great persuasion
V Desert at last the restless city
V He hit an ace, there’s no denying,
V She knew what dreams and cards portended,
V To sad Moldavia she wandered.
Vague threats, predictions, and suspicions,
Verse full of amatory foUy,
VI And into golden fragments shivered.
VI On secret or on open chaffing.
VI Through meadowland and linden alley.
Viewed by the archive youths w^ho cluster
VI And jealous fears my heart are stinging
' ’Vladimir Lensky slumbers here.
Vladimir shuts the book, and then
Vladimir too had odes to write,
Vladimir was completely captured
Vll A wreath, that by the breeze befriended
Vll And later privately defame them
Vll And the assorted ranks and ages,
Vll Since nature, fond of contradiction,
Vlll A shape wherein imagination
Vlll Admired his judgment, always steady.
Vlll Alas! a young and lively maiden
Vlll And as of yore play the odd fellow?
Volume the third of Marmontel,
very just and witty). The author frankly confesses 
Vast wastes, and billows diamond-crested.
variously identified as Countess E. M. Zavodovskaya, 
versationalist, who was a life-long friend of his.
very advanced age Annibal remembered Africa, his 
vich Annibal, at the age of eight was kidnapped from 
vich Pletnyov.
vous observerai seulement que moins on aime une femme
Volcanic Naples broke the peace,
W hen he comes, ah, when he comes.
W hy did you come to visit us?
W'^e ... we don'll shine in any way.
W'hose raptures are forever stilled.
Walked to the stream below the hill; 
”Was all her life thereafter dreary?
Was all the art of love required.
Was bold enough to challenge you —
Was bored again beyond all measure; 
Was bored with everything he tried,
Was but a boy, if truth were told.
Was ever harder task invented?
Was he the carefree soul he seemed?
Was it not thus I long since spent
Was it not you who gently gave me
Was love: he sang it late and soon,
Was one that I found exquisite.
Was our morose Tatyana’s way.
Was pleasure happiness in sooth
Was quite the rustic engineer.
Was reverie; she wreathed with dream 
Was sleeping, heedless of the clock;
Was the interpreter of dreams.
Was to a single occupation;
Was yet a thorough Russian; hence
Watched fondly, in seclusion growing,
We both had played with passion, early
We both had wearied of the game;
We buy with timber and with tallow:
We call it — if no trace I find 
We can’t please the fastidious.
We have so many neighbors, I
We loved them, though, when we were young
We need the wit that nature gave us 
We show at aU times due respect,
We sing about a lucky maid.
We were in reverie transported.
We win the game that w^e are playing.
We yet attend upon the word
We yielded to delicious dreaming.
Wearied by what he had desired.
Wearing a look of self-possession,
Well I remember waves in riot
Well, must you go now? Not so fast!
^^Well, now, Onegin. Yawning?” ^Merely
"Well, shall we start?” The young Othello
Well, take it, since you are so sly!).
Went forth, in dress — a London dandy.
Went off and talked in solemn wise;
Were all of them, as well you know.
Were banished by her animation,
Were greeted, with almost dismaying
Were it not better, if before
Were proper people to engage;
Were signs and warnings to confound her — 
Werther, to be a martyr fated,
We’re all Napoleons, we’re certain —
We’re put to sleep by moral tales;
"What ails you?” "Nothing.” So — away.
What biting words the rogue would utter
What came of it: Always prepared.”
What dazzling hopes awhile are yours.
What difference does that make to me?
What hidden meaning in it lies.
^^What is there more to be lamented
What London haberdashers hallow
What more is asked? The world is warm
''What notions! You may find it blameless.
What of the tryst, then, so iU-fated?
What such a nightmare signifieso 
What tears I shed you do not know.
What the word relatives embraces.
What time it is with no Breguet 
What verse, what talk, how fair a dream!
"What! only solemn odes? Just quote them:
What, in the country, when it’s dreary.
Whate’er was to befall Vladimir,
What’s said beside the fading fire.
When a fine lady seeks to win me 
When at my mistress’ feet I lay
When at my tasks of charity.
When dawn’s fiirst ray had barely shown;
When Eugene reached the restless season
When evening comes he will repair.
When guests arrive she pays no heed.
When he lies deaf to your appeal?
When his poor head began to ache;
When I knew ardor and elation.
When in the banquet-hall he beamed 
When I am gone, and cannot know it.
When I was but a tiny boy!
When I was young — a mere suggestion ...”
When into the hushed study came 
When on the grass in Spring it’s pressed,
When on the ground you see him, stricken. 
When once again, inspired, ecstatic,
When passion’s fires no longer smolder,
When scarce a lad, his heart was captured —
When shall I meet the girl at last
When springtime’s sun shines warm above: 
When suddenly they’re visited
When sweetly through the doors and surely 
When the cool messenger of morning.
When they discussed some weighty matter,
When they employed the mother-tongue;
When two feet tripped toward their lover! 
When Tanya’s tender message came;
When we see him nearing us.
When we were young, we did not tarry.’ ”
When will you lose remembrance of them?
When with diaphanous pale light
When writing that intelligent,
When, wrapped in storm, shall I be battling
Where all is silent, dark and drear.
Where are the storms of love and longing.
Where did her sister take her grief?
Where did she learn this wild excess?
Where go, you madman, to forget?
Where guests disperse, or at a ball!
Where I can . . .” "Ah, another pretty
Where is the burning agitation.
Where is the noble aspiration.
Where is the saturnine betrayer,
Where is your Mend?” the hostess said;
Where I would loll, without a goal, 
Where lindens hide the lovers well;
Where long my buried heart has lain.
Where love burned like a living coal.
Where old Neva’s gray waters flow,
Where she, with God knows who for neighbors.
Where should I seek a dearer treasure?
Where spelling has been sadly spited,
Where the maids sang to keep from cheating
Where Tanya met him face to face.
Where the quick sunbeams on it play,
Where to, God knows; she never said.
Where will my naughty lad repair?
Where winds and tempests were forbidden,
Where you were born, or, as a beau.
Where, in the shadow of the wings.
Where, on a rustic bench at last
Where, set in alphabetic order.
Wherein agreeable vice prevails.
Where’er it goes, I am its lover:
Where’s youth (the rhyme comes glibly) banished? 
Which he declaims with ecstasy
Which ripens fairly, but to drop;
Which told him that his uncle lay 
While doctors hemmed and women cried.
While in due time Monsieur replaced her,
While in the garden’s lavish shade 
While into town the milkmaid presses, 
While our sad rhymesters earn a kick?"
While the dull husband, fully knowing 
While we, with married life not smitten. 
While wildly aU the fiddles sing
While winter’s carpet, softly shining.
While, on the other hand, his wife
Whispers an outworn compliment,
White hand he swiftly smoothed his hair, 
Whither Onegin in a flurry
Who by the high gods’ will is fated
Who called him everything that’s vicious 
Who cannot feel: he is too clever.
Who hear November at the gate.
Who is inspired in his distress:
Who likes a bribe as much as meat.
Who loves you more may write yet more.”
Who never longed and never hated.
Who taught her how to be so lavish
Who thought our Eugene was a gull;
Who tmto every fascinator
Who was the fair young poet’s slayer?”
Who will assent to all we say?
Who will not seek our faults to flout us?
Who will not spread vile lies about us? 
Who will not weary us, with speed?
Who will recall my poor creations.
Who will supply our every need?
Who would not tire of threats and rages,
Who would not weary of evasion.
Who, lulling reason, comes to rest
Who, yawning, with his friends and wife.
Whole families of neighbors driving
Whom silence was about to throttle,
Whom you have found so interesting?
Whose days are living poetry —
^'Whose glances, quickening emotion.
Whose heart experience has chilled,
Whose hearts the years at length anneal; 
Whose peasants live in beggary;
Whose posture was of one defeated.
Whose satisfactions were, through life, 
Whose secret solace on the heart
Whose soul was shaped in Gottingen, 
Who’s had three thousand years of praise.
'Why can’t the devil take you now?’ ”
^'Why did you leave,” the maiden asked him,
"Why do you say so?” "Not a feature 
Why is Tatyana an offender?
Why not? You can have no objection.
Why set two ages thus at odds?
Why should you have such veneration
Why thus dispense with lawful labor?
Wili cure the lad, for good or ill.
Will be the subject of my story.
Will feel her heart with pity burning.
Will halt her horse beside the stone,
Will it no more return to me?
Will love again. But self-control,
Will not debate and ponder it
Will not your soul be filled with rue
Will square accounts, whoever falls.
Will tell the story of your fate.
Will you not come to shed a tear
Wine of the Don, to drink a toast.
With a fine mind and handsome face;
With a gay jest and words untrue.
With all a dandy’s mind can limn.
With ardent words, and how to ravish 
With blotted rhyme and criss-cross kiss — 
With caution through the key -hole spying
With chalk. No knock can ever waken 
With dancing blood, with living heat.
With dignity brings forth his lay.
With drooping head and languid bearing
With easy grace of this and that.
With ecstasy, but with regret.
With every jealous word he reckoned,
With Eugene, and with him alone.
With foreign words; their frequency 
With French it’s spotted like a leopard —
With fiery imagination.
With flame that fails as it appears;
With flashing eyes Onegin rises
With flattering pen and heart aglow.
With frowning brow he would be sitting 
With her neat monogram in wax.
With his own pawn takes his own rook.
With his own self dissatisfied.
With his red belt and sheepskin coat.
With his sardonic comedies;
With hope, then prove it an illusion,
With its unseasonable strife 
With jealousy revive it next.
With joy the contemplative soul!
With kindly hand the old man’s bays.
With lampions bright on sills and ledges
With laughter and with noisy sport.
With Lensky’s fate is occupied;
With most folk, custom’s rule prevails.
With most polite and cool address,
With none to understand or cherish
With Ozerov’s grave lines and tragic. 
With olden days and doddering nurses:
With other children scarcely ever.
With proud perukes and red-heeled shoes.
With pure devotion, knew no bliss 
With rebel will and lively mind.
With roaming flocks was lightly spotted;
With scorn; yet smiles upon the lips 
With shouts and plaudits. Tanya now 
With sighs I think, bemused adorer,
With silver hoar, the meadows lie . . • 
With skill and passion, touch and smile.
With solemn gait and sparkling eye.
With stormy passion’s heat she blazes;
With sudden passion, sudden pain . . .
With tea and jam, and endless tattle
With the avow'als of a boy.
With them, a red-wigged man in glasses:
With those Chateaubriand could write;
With utmost speed Onegin dresses,
With you, nor yet with you who spin 
Within the gondola’s embrace
Within, a noisy clatter swells;
Within, you hear the feet still pounding.
Worthy of him I am addressing,
Would always give three balls a year;
Would be dismayed to see him there;
Would be in every way far better 
Would chide him, would forgive him soon.
Would cite a verse he had by heart,
Would drop so tenderly at even . . .
Would fail to show Diana gleaming,
Would fly the place: she cannot stir;
Would grow more ardent very often,
Would ravish one who prized the treasure
Would scarcely call intelligent.
Would show him every friendliness; 
Would start a quarrel quite as shrewdly, 
Would turn quite taciturn with languor, 
Would, in a body, call at eve.
Would, tete-a-tete, where no one heard. 
’’Write odes, odes only, gentlemen,
Write prose, and take the humbler way;
Wrote, on the spot, an elegy.
where’s your equal to be found?
Was the sad singer shocked to learn 
Was to be readily forgot.
We shall have arched, cast-iron bridges
Wept o’er her daughter as they parted,
Were all unconsciously revealing:
We’ll go together , . . Oh, my chest! . . .
We’ll listen to the forest voices.
We’ll split apart the mountain ridges,
WHERE WILL YOU FIND A BETTER PLACE, GOOD SIR? 
What does my future hold in store?”
What is he? A mere imitation,
What passage, what remark delighted
"What’s to be done? She’s not a child,”
When all went out to say farewell,
When every walk fresh wonders yields;
When once the breath of spring assails me, 
When she can only throw cold water 
When the deep shades of night are thinning:
Where is he? Y'es, I know the one.”
Where moonlight silvered shrub and stone, 
Where Tanya’s met with ”oh-s” and ”ah-s,” 
Where winter-long you were so gay;
Wherever there is Russian ground.
While I lie lapped in rural peace!
While with his clumsy Russian hammer
Who best knows how to separate.
Who early found both death and glory.
Who sees the dark on every hand?
Winter, the sorceress, ’tis she!
With chairs and chests and casseroles,
With cocks in cages (these one slaughters
With every church in bright attire.
With his last victory, awaited 
With jams and featherbeds and bowls.
With rosy light the eastern skies,
With sorrow, but her tears were brief.
With splendor unaccustomed eyes.
^^With the late Lensky almost nightly
With two or three bright -backed imported 
With us, but grows apace; indeed, 
Within the hill -encircled valley
Without a tavern of its own.
Would make the den her library.
111 which Tatyana ought to share
Was jesting subtly and displaying 
Was with Tatyana — ^not, forsooth,
Was wooed by passionate young devils*
We met by chance; /, though^ perceiving
We scared patrols with blatant noise;
We think good wishes are the thing.
We won good old Derzhavin’s blessing
Went raving mad or worse: became 
Were bliss; and death? I should not fear it!
Were in no instance trained upon her,
Were ladies of a certain age,
What are her reveries unspoken?
What languor fills her lovely breast!
What languor in her magic glances!
What of it? Though his eyes were busy,
What petty thought? What trivial feeling? 
What pride, what grief, what thoughts of her!
What sight thus fills him with dismay?
Whatever in these careless stanzas
When destiny brought us together?
"When did he get here, by the bye?
When guests are there, she says a word
When he had come, and if, of late.
When he was calling on an aunt 
When his hot fingers touch her hand.
When in the springtime I would dally
When, a Lyceum lad, I flourished.
Where entertainment was but scant;
Where he had met her ravished gaze.
Where is compassion, where confusion?
Where still the bloody ghost pursued.
Where Thalia as she’s gently napping 
Whereby the mind or heart is shaken.
Which nowadays seems somewhat queer.
While Cicero could scarcely please;
While in the doorway took his station —
Who does not drain the brimming cup,
Who fathered the vast universe.
Who neither crack nor are a joke!
Who, in this cool majestic woman.
'^Who? That fat general, you mean?”
Whoever you may be, my reader,
Whom, at the start of our romance,
Whose heart belonged to other days.
Why do you pay me these attentions? 
Why is he here? Who is he? Task him!
Will look with scorn on my distress!
Wind-tossed, and all too soon decay.
With a French volume in her hand.
With a feigned chill in look and voice. 
With a too wanton kind of fun.
With anguish, pour out at your feet 
With her Onegin at her side —
With him the humble road of life.
With perfect fireedom she receives him;
With studied ways amused the crowd
With the coarse salt of malice, while 
With whirling thoughts his soul grew dizzy,
Within my garden, unexpected;
Without affairs, or rank, or wife,
Without them, there’s no paradise.
Would dare to seek that gentle girl?
Would dream of walking, bride and wife.
Would gallop side by side with me!
Would he be Melmoth or Childe Harold,
which described Onegin’s travels in Russia. It was for 
Wades through the streets, if he but can;
Wants one thing further, more’s the pity;
We careless fellows leave the fretting
Were set upon those casks of wine.
What anguished longing held me fast!
What is it? Water! And this lack 
What more, my friends, do you demand? 
9 What prosy rubbish altogether.
What shipments are in quarantine?
What talk of famine, plague, or war?
When I was gone three years, and wandered 
When mutely on your brink I pondered
When there’s no duty on the wine?
When writing his extravaganzas
While round the tents that nomads raise
Whose shade across the mill-pond lies 
Why don’t I travel with a crutch.
Why not, like that poor Tula man.
With lowered horns, a lonely deer;
With motley figures: people dart
With noisy haste the throng decamps;
With other days come other dreams,
With pipe alight you’d find me sipping
With sails and rich thick traflic crowded,
With the ninth wave the ship’s arriving
Within me — they have found surcease:
was in advance of his age; nowadays, throughout 
were somewhat older than Pushkin. Didelot was a 
written at all. For a sample of the material that 
written by Ozerov, a dramatist who belonged to the 
Wilno. His brother went to Constantinople and after- 
wards to St. Petersburg, offering a ransom for him, 
was being carried off.
where the fountains of the paternal home were play- 
who, at a distance, swam after the ship in which he 
whom Pushkin admired.
winter in Baratynsky’s ”Eda.” — Pushkin.
worthy man, who, as B. M. Fyedorov points out, 
would be brought to their father, their hands tied 
wrote: '^The other day Yevpraxiya and I compared 
Will bravely face the stake, nor wax 
was a schoolmate and an intimate friend of Pushkin’s.
was among those present.
was closely related to his ancestors.” He meant, of 
which have been preserved in a secret 
who held various posts, including that of Minister of 
whom he loved and who was slain by a jealous wife.
whom Pushkin was at one time in love.
with a seaman, referred to in the original as Morali 
words of a refrain in a duettino by Vincenzo Gabussi; 
writing of Eugene Onegin.
wrote a group of "Crimean Sonnets.”
Was then our ruler, as you know.
When all the foreign cooks were bent 
When we were bowed beneath the rod 
Where Russia’s czar was king of kings.
Who vanished like the shades of dawn . . .
Whom fame had, by strange chance, been sunning.
X Rejoiced the fair one but to grieve her,
XI He could pretend despair, to frighten.
[xiii
XV Find notes piled Mgh. What? Invitations?
XVi Upon Ms beaver collar falling.
XVii They’ve raised a thirst there is no quenching.
xix Can others ever quite replace you?
xvill Sped shafts of satire at the nation,
XX The gallery claps and stamps, atwitter;
XXI Onegin presses; with his vaunted
XXll While in the lobby sleepy flunkeys
XXlll The cabinet where fashion’s student
Xxiv And, for the senses’ sweet confusion,
XXV Why should one quarrel with good breeding?
XXVI The learned world would have me mention
xli]
xlii Indeed, today there is a vicious
xliii In dashing cabs, you too were fated
xliv The sum of all his thoughts is zero,
xlix
xlv As bored as I with vain inventions —
xlvi One who has felt, is often mournful.
xlvii O’er the Neva the sky woidd soften
xxviii
:xxviii
xxxi
xxxiv
^xxxix
xxxvii
X Serene as maidens simple-hearted.
XI The local gentry’s round of pleasure
XIII Instead of that, our friend was burning
XIV We think all other people zeros,
Xli There was something intelligible
XV So immature and so beguiling.
XVI Of foreign history and Russian,
XVll Onegin’s mocking voice would soften
xix
Xxi By little Olga, and, enraptured.
XXll She was his lyre’s first inspiration,
XXlll Was gentle Olga — ^in her dimple
XXV
xxxii
XXXIV And never looked at her too nearly —
XXXlll She used a sing-song voice; and, posing,
XXXV Eating the pancakes custom hallowed;
xxxvii
X She is the novelist’s creation:
xi A noble style of writing, fashioned
Xlll I shall yet cease to be a poet;
XU We like romances not too rowdy
xiv Next of the children’s breathless meeting.
XV Your fate is put into the keeping
XVl She drops her eyes, her heart is aching.
Xvii ”What ails you, Tanya?” ^^Oh, it’s trifling,
xix
XXI And then a sudden thought possessed her . . .
XXii As pure as winter, and as frigid;
XXlll A glance upon their urgent lovers.
XXV
xxviii
xxxi
XXXll Upon her tongue the wafer quivers —
xxxiv
xxxvii
XXxix God, what can he think of me?”
xH Before her, there was no denying,
xl Her shaken heart to stop its pounding,
X Refused — he soon found consolation;
XI Its girlish fire began to quicken
xil ''You wrote me. There is no use seeking
XIV I am unworthy of your virtue;
Xlll If as a husband and a father
XV Whose spouse has left her, discontented.
XVI I feel, if not indeed a lover’s.
XVil And blinded by the tears that glistened
xix
XXI And firmly count upon preserving
XXli In whom discover no defection?
XXlll The pains of love still agitated
XXV
x4nd found his chains a thing to praise.
xxviii
XXX You tomes wherewith resplendent ladies
XXXI His lyrics breathe a candid passion.
XXXli Of elegy that he despises.
xxxiv
XXXIX Sometimes a kiss as fresh as she,
XXXVi His daily occupations duly
XXXVll I shall, to pleasure you, detail.
XXXVlll And, if a black-eyed girl permitted,
xHv An icy bath begins his morning.
xl And even as we are denying
xli And on the highway marches boldly
xlii (The reader waits the rhyme -word: beaming.
xliii This is the season eyes grow weary.
xlix You have her mother’s invitation
xlv This is what poets should be drinking
xlvi I love it still, at the dictation
xlvii A thread of smoke is upward drifting;
xlviii ”Pour me a little more, be sparing . . .
X And in the bath-house, not the dwelling.
XI She walks across a snowy clearing,
XIII Of her rough lackey is behind her,
XIV A branch leans down to snare her tresses,
XU No helping hand is near to lead her
XV And in his arms she lies inertly,
XVI She hears wild shouts and glasses clinking
XVll A goose’s snaky neck bestriding —
xix
XXI The fearful shadows gather thickly;
XXll Her book in hand, and slowly turning
XXlll To Tanya, and therewith surrendered
XXV
xxviii
XXX With the emotions that assail her
XXXI And girlish fits of nerves he hated:
XXXll Was at that moment busy gloating
xli The waltz sends tireless couples twirling
xlii To the mazurka; with the pounding
xliv
xlv What does he hear? She dared . . . He’s driven
xxxiv
xxxvii
X Severe, and he was not acquitting
XI That he was yet a man of feeling.
XIII The base coquette before the duel;
XIV Deeply disturbed as thus she tasked him.
XIX But nurselings of the Muse have acted
Xll And here the gossip is returning
XV And, full of grief, the wistful dreamer
XVI Broods over all he dare not say:
XVil ''From threatened ruin I’ll retrieve her,
XVlll Had Tanya known that on the morrow
XX Undressed, and opened — ^need I mention? —
XXI ^^Oh, golden days, my springtide cherished.
XXll When I, mayhap, past joy and sorrow.
xxiv
:XVlll How long since they were happy-hearted,
XXVI Upon the mill-stone dissertating
XXVll If fault there be, you will acquit me
XXXIV One who, by a rash glance offended.
XXXll The blood from the fresh wound was steaming;
XXXlll To see him, baited, turn and rally.
xxxvi
XXXVlll Like many others have been fated
XXxix To lose his ardor with his youth.
xl The lover, poet, pensive dreamer,
xli Weaving his shoe of bast, the shepherd
xlii The while her wistful spirit wholly
xliii All his concerns recounting duly.
xliv The hopes of old will not be granted.
xlv Amen: but Jfriendly be our parting.
xlvi But lulled by the fond dream that dowers
X Another captured her attention,
XI That Olga’s love, alas, was mortal.
XIV Her heart speaks ever of the cruel
XIX Each object seems a priceless treasure,
Xll Since now her uhlan was betaking
Xlli Till they were out of sight and hearing . . .
XV The dancers from the green were wending.
XVI I might just see the house and garden,”
XVll At once the children run off spryly
XVlll Please follow me,” she said politely.
XX But it is late. Above the river.
XXI And came to the abandoned dwelling
XXll That there were works he never banished
xxiv
XXvi And Petushkov’s. We had a visit
XXVll Expenses, and therewith decided
XXviii And off into the fields she rushes,
xli ”How long do you remain?” ^Conceive it!”
xlii We’ll show off Tanya. To my sorrow,
xliii She finds the city cold and hateful.
xliv Her wistful languor greeted gaily
xlix The poor young girl does not pass muster —
xlv Princess Yelena wears the bonnet
xlvi From head to foot, and Moscow’s Graces
xlvii Embellished with a little slander,
xlviii She thinks, hut it is sheer vexation
xxxi
xxxiii
xxxvi
X Who ripened, like good port or sherry,
X. is an admirable man.
Xi That we were hourly faithless to it,
XIII (A plaguey wish by which are guided
XIV A lady down the room advances,
Xli 'When they proclaim you odd or vicious,
XV Men, while they did not dare pursue her.
XVI Its vogue — since we are not progressive.
XVll To come, as from another planet,
Xviii ”A Larina.” ”Tanya?” ”You’ve met her?”
xix Her eyebrows did not even quiver,
XX Quite tete-a-tete he’d lectured duly
XXI Thoughts sad and sweet still agitating
XXll The clock strikes ten: he’s off, he’s flying,
XXlll His friend Onegin by recalling
XXV
xxviii
xxxi
XXXIX But he has not become a poet,
XXXlli Alas, these missives fare no better.
XXXV
XXXvii Imagination is unreeling
XXXVlii A poet — this were paying dearly
xl This same odd fellow, uncorrected,
xli The former Tanya, recognizing
xLll Her passive hands; her pain concealing,
xliii How did you take my girUsb letter?
xliv You did not like me . . . That was bitter.
xlix The words of this most earnest pleader:
xlv One thought I would that you were keeping
xlvi The homage that the gay world tenders,
xlvii But now my fate is quite decided.
xlviii By what a storm his heart was shaken:
Yawned through the long thanksgiving mass,
Ye vanished tumults, rest in peace!
”1?” ”Yes, a birthday celebration —
”Yes, after all these years. Aline!”
Yes, and the fear of the impression
Yes, but your horse will soon be sliding,
Yes, deep within I had the feeling.
Yes, now the door is opened for them,
Yet all is well — each has its due:
Yet bidding the poor girl adieu,
Yet grieve for him . . . But wherefore grieve?
Yet in vain boredom I am wasting
Yet soon they let down their defences.
Yet, as a rule, despised mankind;
You also, youthful belles, belated
You are an early bird! Last night
You are the helpmeet I’d be choosing:
”You are the one that I adore.
You are to come, and named the day.”
You came and lectured me so coldly —
You came in dreams: I feared to waken,
You care to? Check accounts, or drink,
You dwell in dreams, and you persist 
You handsome albums decorated
You haunts where I might stay in hiding. 
You have a fever . . .” "Fever, no:
You have a Russian family setting,
You hear amid the gay street’s fluster
You in my fond imagination . . .
You knew Ruslan and fair Ludmila;
You knew the answer — as you say: 
You know the truth? What is the use 
You know; besides, all lots were equal 
You lectured me, I listened, meek;
You looked in at the house just twice
"You love the younger? Curious creature!”
You made me drunk in other days.
You may dismiss them as unfit
You may expect no less firom me;
You may rely upon the fair,
You men who lived in wedded bliss
You might be pleased — if so, advise me —
You mothers, as your own once did.
You prove you know, beyond a doubt,
You rustic Priams, and you gentle
You scarce can get a dish of pottage:
You seek: be it extravaganzas 
You shone as with a nuptial splendor:
You should perceive udth eye severe 
You sigh, and think with farrowed brow —
You smooth his pillow and contrive
You spend your time, I’d like to know?”
You spoke, my very soul was shaken.
You still retain the memory 
You too, farewell, my curious neighbor.
You venerator of the Muse
You who will smooth in after days
(You will recall the circumstance)?
You witness of that fallen glory.
You woodlands where I used to roam,
” You ’ll have to take her to the city —
You, dreams of sacred poesy?
You, figments of sweet reverie.
You, readers, with another tale:
You, you alone would be my wife.
Young girls, in passing, hushed their chatter;
Young love, because it is so blind,
Young Olga coming to make tea,
Young Olga was the first to stir;
Young timid love, and that was shocking. 
Young Tanya, whom I still hold dear.
Your candor filled me with confusion;
Your charm? My verses sang your praise; 
Your dreams, your high simplicity.
"Your fashionable world is hateful;
Your frank avow-al touched me nearly.
Your friendship.” At this invitation 
Your grief wall bring me to remorse?
Your Grandison?” "I can’t remember —
Your heart responded how? Pray, tell!
Your honor’s most astute defender —
Your look that made my spirit sink!
Your Madam Larina’s, I find,
Your magic music and your skill:
Your marked seducer you discern.
’’Your name is — what?” He passes on.
Your Olga’s face, so round and blooming.
Your own young days. Were you in love?”
Your Olga? And Tatyana too?”
Your Phyllis, whom you idolize.
Your pleasures with a taste more keen,
Your scorn. You did not find surprising 
Your spouse awaits; come to me, come! . . .”
Your version of Tatyana’s letter
Your way in soulful flight and free.
Your wicked pencils, oh, St. Priest!
Your winter is cut out for you.
Youth’s fever is its own excuse 
You’d find the way of vice was hard,
You’d give him Adam Smith to read.
You’ll bid us free, to speed our task,
You’ll grant it’s time to part, my dears.
You’re bored.” ”As ever. But I mark
Yuletide they duly celebrated
year-old girl or she has that of a twenty -five-year-old 
years of Anna’s reign, nominally considered to be 
Yes, jealousy’s attacks can seize us
"Zarema”: the Khan’s jealous wife, who figures in
Zaretzky and the honest fellow 
Zaretzky bit his lip, quite vexed;
Zaretzky was not one to shirk —
Zaretzky, not at all disguising
Zaretzky, once a jolly rowdy,
ZHUKOVSKY
Zizi, that asks to be embraced;

=================================================================
Sorted (from end to start):
published under the imprint of Martin Zadeka, a 
For six weeks yearly be a mess, a 
Stanza XLIII, Line 10. Dominique de Pradt, a
Stanza IX, Lines 7-8, Malek-Adhel: the hero of a
Stanza XI I ^ Line 10. Faublas: the rakish hero of a
served by the family. (In time we expect to publish a 
For this new hero prithee feel a
but Peter I did not agree to return his godson. Till a 
personal enmity, was transferred to Siberia under a 
him to indicate the omitted chapter by dots or a 
Them both aside and only for a 
dispatched by Prince Potemkin to the Empress as a 
Kuchelbecker, a schoolmate of Pushkin’s who was a 
He looked the poet, when he’d let a
Stares out upon the shadowed lea:
Smooth aria, the eager plea.
Is brought, and Dunya pours his tea;
arabia.
All Russia . . .
French choreographer established in Russia.
political writings were popular in Russia.
Oh, humans, like your first mamma.
Poor Tanya, lighted by Diana,
Inserting: belle Tatiana.
I, too, recalling poor Svetlana,
and Tatyana.
''But tell me, which one is Tatyana?”
But she took fright, our shy Tatyana;
Stanza //, Line 3. The reference is to the examina-
Eliminated belle Nina,
Stanza VII, Lines 1-2. Here Pushkin is para-
Diana’s breast, the face of Flora,
And so, my home was then Odessa . . .
Pushkin stopped when he first arrived in Odessa.
Storm-giver Zeus decrees Odessa
Stanza L, Line 3. The beach: written at Odessa,
^'Idol mid’^ or ^^Benedetta^^'^
Of the magnificent Neva.
Buyanov leads off Pustyakova;
And Lensky — Tanya; Kharlikova,
"But you were married, nurse,” said Tanya,
"How was it?” "By God’s will, my Vanya 
Pushkin discarded, see Note to Chapter VI, Stanza
THOU, MY SWEET SVETLANA.
'^The omitted stanzas have repeatedly given occa-
The girls with Olga and Tatyana
TO TATYANA
to Maturin’s Melmoth, the Wanderer; Jean Sbogar: a 
The Russian envoy rescued him and sent hi m as a 
were somewhat older than Pushkin. Didelot was a 
the image of her future husband as his spirit takes a 
Young Olga coming to make tea,
You knew Ruslan and fair Ludmila;
V Is like the poet’s maid, Svetlana,
variously identified as Countess E. M. Zavodovskaya, 
He came, unripe, unto the tomb!
And Dunya squeaks (would she were dumb!)
Another day: he still is dumb;
Dear friend, before this heart is nmnb —
No fancy of a worldly mob.
No coarse mot of a witty snob.
Before him, loud with seething trajfl&c,
And tucked away, an almanac
From a moth-eaten almanac;
:ic
Semyonova there wrought her magic 
For all that musty rhetoric.
Oh, waters of the Adriatic!
Renowned, resplendent, diplomatic.
Past thick-ranked guests, aristocratic,
There is no notion so erratic.
Stanza XLVIII, Line 3. The bard: ^’An ecstatic
At least of some complaint arthritic?
Of such a manner, I’m pedantic.
His strain was languid, dark (romantic
Call it magnetic or hypnotic.
But by some influence despotic.
Devoured Stendhal, the arrant skeptic.
And Fontenelle, acute, eupeptic;
Born of a liar in an attic.
And so all hail to you, nine Muses, etc.”
The children learn their A-B-C.
With Ozerov’s grave lines and tragic. 
When once again, inspired, ecstatic,
The old assessor, paralytic?
And on her shoulder leans his head;
For Petersburg’s no sleepyhead.
But worldly quarrels breed the dread
As the two foes, with even tread.
From Northern snows: you loved to tread 
Drives home; and so at last to bed:
Four steps toward a narrow bed.
And still our Eugene lies abed
By thaw and grimy steps defaced.
Beside that stream with shadows laced
A ballroom tyrant, tightly laced,
A simple monument is placed.
But soon was yawning while he raced:
A thought in which he acquiesced.
All this is now outworn and faded,
From Eugene: he was far too jaded —
And all distraction finds her jaded,
And so of course the girl decided
But by your will; my fate* s decided;
'^And happiness, before it glided
By this delightful counsel guided,
A precious pledge! The man was guided
But, Lord, before the evening’s ended 
Away, while the old sleigh was mended 
But here’s our lady unattended.
"Ah, nurse, nurse darling, I am hounded 
And mists above the meadows brooded;
As the dark coverts were denuded;
And yet her face was pale and clouded
And round the loaded carriage crowded,
A deep economist, indeed,
By honor’s dictates, was indeed 
Are such a man would rather bleed
Five centuries are all we need 
A modern Regulus; at need 
But wishes them away with speed.
But in my youth no one engaged 
course, his great-grandfather Hannibal, the alleged 
Alas! the altar-fire is quenched.
But left alone, Onegin sighed.
And health and hope and joy are banished:
Ah, dreams! where has your sweetness vanished?
Beside the stanza all unfinished
But, lacking them, the joy’s diminished;
By rest, a novel torment, punished . . .
Confide to it the wish she cherished.
And hurriedly before it perished
By chance, these verses have not perished;
Each room he finds unoccupied.
A crouching huntsman, ill -concealed, 
Again imagination’s kindled.
A touch, and the sharp cliffs are beveled,
Belong to youth, with youth are fled.
As do the sins of years long fled 
And loved the duties well fulfilled.
As Eugene stares his heart is chilled
And in the misty moonlight furled.
Beneath his fingers would have hurled 
And in the court gay magpies screamed;
For Lensky, the cotillion seemed 
And valleys, trees, and hamlets seemed 
By poetry and love, or sickened 
A moment since, this heart was quickened 
And wdth a heart for love designed,
Because it’s long since I have sinned.
And now the one-armed prince had beckoned
From speech: you never would have learned
Eugene himself with eyes that burned
And mortgaged all the land he owned.
Fling him currants ripe and red.
At twenty to the fashion bred,
For as it is, my style is peppered
"Dear, you are ill,” the old nurse muttered.
Another set of lines transpired 
And never loved where it desired,
By facile conquest swiftly tired.
But that the wedding was deferred
From these the man might be inferred.
And sleep at last her boon conferred;
But somehow his mere look averred
And feelings, long quiescent, stirred;
Can be surprised, who is not stirred 
By one emotion only stirred;
And if her soul was deeply stirred,
From hour to hour yet more enraptured
And she — she who for Tanya posed . . . 
And in due time the husband passed 
By candle-light she rose and dressed.
And next he dressed . . .
Drinks wine from tumblers,” it was hissed;
From the hussar, Pykhtin, who used
And all, our tender dreamer fused 
Buyanov’s hand she has refused,
By what Tolstoy’s fine brush created.
Among sad chffs he moves. I’m fated
For here, Napoleon, elated
And he was not the least elated 
Enlightenment may be belated
All greeted and congratulated
Eugene had long abominated
But no, our paths have separated.
AU jealous thoughts evaporated —
And then, with Olga, how he acted!
Fell at her feet, his heart contracted;
All evening Lensky was distracted,
As Eugene, by regrets distracted.
By her dull partner’s mood infected;
And as she looked about, dejected, 
By solitude nowise dejected;
As she surveyed him . . . His dejected 
All thoughts, but those of you, rejected.
And when the little girls collected
And while a husband is respected
Does Eugene drive? Yes, I suspected
At once that guests might be expected.
And in her soul was resurrected
An alien, roving unrestricted,
And sings, off key. The song is greeted
And not a single w^ord deleted;
Alone a lazy boatman lifted
A song across the waters drifted;
First at the desk, with lamp unlighted.
And an eternal friendship plighted
And by this shaking bridge affrighted,
Eugene, as he his turn awaited.
By a slim icicle united.
But love grew greater, unreqmted;
By new desires I am enchanted.
And watch her, languidly enchanted!
But was true joy to Eugene granted 
’’Alas, poor Yorick!” he lamented,
Enough. ’Tis time that I presented
By one persistent thought he’s haunted.
Admired — ^in sketching whom you blunted 
And here too was [Prolasov], stunted
But by rule only, and he doted
An honest fellow, be it noted.”
But she in whom my thoughts are rooted.
And sentimentally devoted
And so without more words, departed;
Eight times changed places since they started; 
But this gay circle I deserted.
(As I in jest so oft asserted)?
Can the sad thought with which I flirted
A book, a walk where shadows flitted
Beyond, the plain, with hamlets dotted,
Before whom my bold lyre is muted,
For the corvee he substituted
Are here, with scissors straight and curved. 
All wish to see their daughters wed
At thirty profitably wed.
As well as write; and how he bowed!
Displays to the indifferent crowed 
And I confess I am perplexed:
For epigrams, and was annoyed 
At him . . . And if she was amazed,
Aghast, Tatyana recognized
As though a chiQy hand were laid
Deep in the dust that time has laid.
And jealous longing frets the maid —
By worldly approbation paid.
By someone awkward and afraid.
And Lensky, firm and unafraid.
For such a life, I am afiraid.
And my Zaretzky, as I said,
Daylong, nightlong, thus to be bid 
A letter heartfelt, artless, candid;
For epigrams it would be splendid . . .
And the improvement will be splendid! 
And stop defenceless in the field.
Enchanted her while yet a child,
At first Madame controlled the child;
And of the glorious days of old,
And I was just thirteen years old.
Behind the curtain’s funeral fold
Bare steppe is all you will behold;
Each whispers from behind her hand:
For the cotillion begs her hand.
Each with a weapon in his hand.
And dream about his native land.
A faddist and a firebrand.
At either end the two friends stand.
At first disturbed me, in the end 
Beyond the grave, yes, at the end 
Aind in a letter to a j&riend
And though the talk of my yotmg friend
Ally or enemy, attend
Exceptions may be hard to find,
But fast or slow, leave town behind!
And how it strikes me, never mind).
But for my part I do not mind
Below you see the river wind
And then once more till noon sleep sound.
a celebrated restaurant in the Paris of the period.
artist of the period.
And sharing leisure, thoughts, and food,
And coveting the fatal food;
At fifteen feet: his aim was good.
And with strange languor fill my blood!
By this most black and vengeful mood? 
But by the window she would brood
Because they lacked — hadn’t one heard? — 
Bassoon and flute at once are heard.
But the discussions I have heard, 
Even by accident is heard 
And virtue won its due reward.
A more magnificent reward.
A cross, a question-mark, a word —
By a translated move or word,
By mocking glance or chilly word,
A black reproach in every word.
Even the pistol and the sword.
And its late sequel as absurd.
Drenched, deluged, choked with viscous mud;
A brazen fellow, starched and proud.
And near a stream, stood calm and proud, 
A gay mazurka holds the crowd;
FROM MOSCOW TO NIZHNI -NOVGOROD:
P. A. Katenin (who is not prevented by his ad-
The sleepless fellow’s heart and head.
The insults time heaps on her head 
Sweet Lei now hovers o’er her head.
To sketch a woman’s legs or head.
Is gaily whirling overhead,
That the first strophes should be read 
To disavow- it now-. I read
You’d give him Adam Smith to read.
The pile of books no longer read,
Or light verse that our fathers read.
The weak would mend life’s fraying thread;
Upon voluptuous rugs instead.
To use her own, and hence they had 
Sing and bring a dashing lad
The cost of post-horses, was glad 
Stanza V, Line 3, Svetlana: the heroine of a ballad
Keen air, and trots without a goad;
Travels how different a road —
She would go stumbling down the road.
Upon his sledge tries out the road;
Then at the rug that decks the bed,
The secrets of the nuptial bed;
He’s driven from the ball to bed:
Undressed at last and went to bed.
To stand, dear vision, by my bed?
Mute, motionless, and cherub -faced;
Zizi, that asks to be embraced;
sudden. An observation betokening an experienced 
Now Lovelace’s renown is faded.
Tatyana’s bloom is all but faded;
In this important sport the jaded
To a new pose will he be goaded,
Upon the steppes that it invaded,
Notes here. Those not marked ^'Pushkin” have been added
Upon the banks by Dnieper raided,
Thus he grew restless and decided
xlvii But now my fate is quite decided.
XXVll Expenses, and therewith decided
Her love in Russian has confided;
Now I am at your mercy, guided
XIII (A plaguey wish by which are guided
His soul by highest motives guided,
He’d suffer bonds again, provided 
The darling object was provided
The table shone with wax; they handed
Just as the social rites demanded.
It wrong to scorn when pride commanded —
Suppose your pistol-shot has ended
Till somehow the long evening’s ended,
Thus Lensky his good Mend defended.
Tanya with simple faith defended
XXXIV One who, by a rash glance offended.
Vll A wreath, that by the breeze befriended
Stay indoors, by a book befriended?
To have our roads completely mended, 
Upon a trailing branch suspended
’'Something detained him. He intended 
The day upon which they intended
V She knew what dreams and cards portended,
"I lived, by strangers quite surrounded.
I say: give up a style outmoded.
More often now the sun was clouded;
Odessa was my home then, shrouded
The sky breathed autumn, somber, shrouded;
With sails and rich thick traflic crowded,
With us, but grows apace; indeed, 
Its fateful harassments indeed
My earnest counsels prithee heed.
When guests arrive she pays no heed.
My services in time of need:
Who will supply our every need?
Who will not weary us, with speed?
Of worldly scorn, and thus are fed.
The hope on which my heart is fed?
My mother-in-law would have raged.”
That by a sudden storm was drenched;
The last chapter of Eugene Onegin was published
Where’s youth (the rhyme comes glibly) banished? 
The nasal twang she also banished.
XXll That there were works he never banished
Onegin’s taste for books had vanished
Lost like a muted sound and vanished.
The album and the corset vanished,
Onegin’s portrait has been finished,
I write, and longing is diminished;
In Orient luxury once cherished.
XXI ^^Oh, golden days, my springtide cherished.
The trace you left has long since perished
When, a Lyceum lad, I flourished.
It may be, in your glory flourished.
Onegin, meet him, born and nourished
On Apuleius gladly nourished.
One thing alone he loved, he breathed;
So easily, with passion seethed;
He might have gone to bed and died
With his own self dissatisfied.
With Lensky’s fate is occupied;
Her weakness, and she coughed and cried.
While doctors hemmed and women cried.
Poor dreamer whom he sadly harried;
My Eugene through the winter tarried.
Was bored with everything he tried,
would be brought to their father, their hands tied 
No more the casual pen is led 
Onegin watches her, congealed:
Upon her wrath her lips are sealed.
V Hence oft he had his stallion saddled
The neighbors promptly called and twaddled
Her chest heaves, and her cheeks are kindled 
The heart that thought its fires had dwindled
Her eyes shine, and her breath has dwindled.
Or as a Quaker go appareled,
The river and its banks are leveled;
^ hen but a fortnight more had fled
Her son! to distant regions fled,
The lady of the house: she’s fled —
Transparent veil the sky is muffled.
It’s late. Odessa sleeps, unruffled;
Hope lies to them, and they’re beguiled.
His heart with sore repentance filled.
Whose heart experience has chilled,
To hear a voice cry: ^'Well? He’s killed.” 
The neighbor now declares: ''He’s killed.”
W'hose raptures are forever stilled.
My girlish dreams forever stilled.
Soft glance, nor welcome sweetly caroled.
When in the banquet-hall he beamed 
The trees in wintry silver gleamed;
The masses of your mountains gleamed,
To her a tiresome thing she dreamed. 
Was he the carefree soul he seemed?
His father listened, frowned, and groaned.
So Eugene preached and Tanya listened,
XVil And blinded by the tears that glistened
Or post-horses, if thus inclined.
Once dwelt, two pines are intertwined —
These warnings in your ears are dinned 
xi A noble style of writing, fashioned
There was a time when the impassioned
is, Wilhelm Kuchelbecker, the schoolmate mentioned 
magazine is named; it was The Well-Intentioned.
With every jealous word he reckoned,
My brainless pupil almost learned
The secret shame with which I burned^
She sought the path, but as she turned, 
The way a Russian verse is turned.
ship and the inclemency of the climate, he returned 
Tatyana trembled and grew red. 
Replied as though he little cared 
What came of it: Always prepared.”
wrote: '^The other day Yevpraxiya and I compared 
To this half-Russian, German-bred.
The feasts where wealth and wit were squandered,
When I was gone three years, and wandered 
V To sad Moldavia she wandered.
XXlll To Tanya, and therewith surrendered
It happened that a peddler tendered
When mutely on your brink I pondered
Near by (when springtime rains have peppered
That our bright pristine hopes grew battered,
Our freshest dreams grew sear, and scattered 
"I am in love,” poor Tanya uttered
Lay hid in all the prose they uttered —
(Not with fine words are parsnips buttered);
VI And into golden fragments shivered.
Her face would pale, her body quivered.
Is dashing in the cab he hired.
whom Pushkin admired.
Wearied by what he had desired.
Of which Onegin never tired.
Was all the art of love required.
Off to the ball as is required,
How dismal to be young, and bored!”
To think the girl that he adored
Or caU the actress he preferred
Till travel, as you’ll have inferred,
To note how little she is stirred;
His heart leaps up, his soul is stirred.
Their steaming cups have barely stirred 
The time came when he quite abhorred
When scarce a lad, his heart was captured —
Vladimir was completely captured
Xxi By little Olga, and, enraptured.
friend, Miinnich. Miinnich was amazed and advised 
How many chapters Fate has closed! 
Lord help us, friends! To be accursed
They traveled, but a dull hour passed 
He was in bliss. Indeed, thrice blessed 
The day of busy cares is blessed.
Her motion, in pure splendor dressed!
When on the grass in Spring it’s pressed,
Nor yet were her soft lips compressed.
Nor eases tears too long suppressed.
Onegin, what shrewd line expressed 
She glances at the road, distressed.
Turn pale or blush, as one distressed . . .
The gifts the newcomer possessed;
The nurse alone might well have guessed,
He leaves the ladies’ hands unkissed;
Ladies he left he never missed.
Pale nature shudders, tempest -tossed.
The matchless bore — on these she mused; 
The third day interest abated
To me alone he dedicated! . . .’?
III Killed flies, and snugly rusticated.
Whose posture was of one defeated.
That will not be ten times repeated
The bench where the old nurse was seated 
xliii In dashing cabs, you too were fated
XXXVlll Like many others have been fated
Werther, to be a martyr fated,
This warlike rover who was fated
To the young ladies what was fated.
Who by the high gods’ will is fated
Upon the urn, and think: Til -fated!
What of the tryst, then, so iU-fated?
Here the patricians congregated.
XXXI And girlish fits of nerves he hated:
Who never longed and never hated.
The day was set, his heart elated;
You also, youthful belles, belated
Philosophers have calculated 
The creatures fancy animated;
The plans to have been consummated,
Yuletide they duly celebrated
This horseman the Pope consecrated,
The room where the old man berated
The dolts that must be tolerated.
You handsome albums decorated
The rings that the new mode dictated.
XXlll The pains of love still agitated
XIX But nurselings of the Muse have acted
She puzzles till she is distracted,
The little tricks that are affected
The faithful one is soon affected:
They find her odd — so unaffected.
She seems the image quite perfected
So countrified, a bit dejected,
The language of the gods rejected . . .
Upon the stove the cat elected
It was for you that I neglected
uncle always was respected;
Is more than could have been expected:
Within my garden, unexpected;
xl This same odd fellow, uncorrected,
How justly now I am afflicted.
Though he was brave, though he was gifted,
The jagged flint still harmless, lifted.
Like smoke across the azure drifted;
Into the pan the powder’s sifted,
’Tis thus the gay dog’s thoughts are freighted,
The promise of her spring was blighted,
What passage, what remark delighted
The young Othello is delighted!
With his last victory, awaited 
I He’d greet the hour so long awaited.
Perchance a humble lot awaited
He feared that he had not incited
She noted, trembling and excited.
She looks, half soothed and half excited,
Though great, the poet’s not conceited.
Where spelling has been sadly spited,
When suddenly they’re visited
There other things were done and bruited.
For the United Slavs recruited.
Light quit-rent, and the slave, well suited
She flies, a thing of down, enchanted;
He can no longer be enchanted,
One foot upon the floor is planted.
here! Eugene!'’ she panted;
xliv The hopes of old will not be granted.
How blessed the lover who is granted
No respite to his heart is granted —
Tatyana was her name then — granted.
She lacked her sister’s charm, and wanted
^^What is there more to be lamented
Have learned how hearts can be tormented.
I might (who knows?) have grown contented.
’’Once in those arms I lay contented,
XV Whose spouse has left her, discontented.
Here in this village unfrequented.
Was ever harder task invented?
To him; and thereby sadly daunted, 
The house rocks with applause; undaunted,
’Mid all the conquests that he vaunted? 
XXI Onegin presses; with his vaunted
His nag has ribs that might be counted. 
The bearded old postilion’s mounted —
The comrade upon whom she doted.
Ivi With pleasure I have often noted
The mind’s reflections coldly noted,
He is, though not renowned or quoted,
Her dove, her confidante devoted,
To this were fribbling hours devoted,
To love and idleness devoted.
llX And as of old I mix, free-hearted.
X Serene as maidens simple-hearted.
The poor old lady, broken-hearted.
Strange woes that left me broken-hearted . . .
The whist -players are Hon-hearted:
:XVlll How long since they were happy-hearted,
The foes! How long had they been parted
Wept o’er her daughter as they parted,
My high-flown fancies have departed.
The Muse has come, and love departed,
The theme from which he ne’er departed
On hearing this, Zaretzky started
The pleasures relished, triumphs thwarted;
He might have altered and deserted
It gave the tyrant it deserted
IV How often, by her tales diverted
This whiskered regiment diverted
The neighbors, pleasantly diverted,
The Muse — to marriage been converted.
VI And one and all of them exerted
With two or three bright -backed imported 
We were in reverie transported.
Lord Byron’s tales, which well consorted
Thus once again he manifested
He took his coffee here, and rested,
Vast wastes, and billows diamond-crested.
In this affair our friend was tested
Then I required, as I protested,
The steward came here when requested;
She might return; yes, if permitted. 
XXXVlll And, if a black-eyed girl permitted,
Pretending calmness, Tanya quitted 
With roaming flocks was lightly spotted;
the author’s friends among the exiled or executed 
Mayhap the lyre so early muted
Mayhap he would have been reputed.
Where still the bloody ghost pursued.
That miracles could be achieved.
He racked his brains, and still believed
That teeth and nails may both be served.
In the mazurka, ’twas allowed.
XXXV Eating the pancakes custom hallowed;
They loved the good old ways, and wallowed
Surveying fallow land and plowed.
Raise doubts that leave his heart perplexed,
Zaretzky bit his lip, quite vexed;
The contemplative dryads played.
Or like an air from Freischiitz played
The sign with shaking hand, she prayed.
The tone the gentlemen employed,
Now met his spouse. The princess gazed 
The dreaded one, the dearly prized:
His uncle’s in his cofl&n laid:
The charming and ingenuous maid
We sing about a lucky maid.
His debt to nature has been paid.
^"Go, leave me, nurse,” Tatyana said,
Then he came up to her and said: 
Some are no more, as Saadi said.
Where to, God knows; she never said.
Where is your Mend?” the hostess said;
Or else — or else — , else God forbid!
You mothers, as your own once did.
"These evenings? At the Larins’.” "Splendid.
I have known women, stern and rigid.
XXii As pure as winter, and as frigid;
To sit beside an invalid!
No matter: lisping like a child,
"What’s to be done? She’s not a child,”
The mother groans. "It drives me wild;
In winter when the nights were wild.
The charming lad was rather wild.
The newcomers but ape the old;
Ombre and Boston claim the old,
In our lime too, in days of old),
^'The mind grows blunt as one grows old;
year-old girl or she has that of a twenty -five-year-old 
The gamblers, worthy men and bold:
The master had no need to scold
The magazines that like to scold
Upon its staples, not on gold —
Of all the dreams the heart can hold.
The proud lorgnettes the ladies hold
Harold.
Would he be Melmoth or Childe Harold,
Surly and languid as Childe Harold.
That’s fine, but if the truth were told.
Was but a boy, if truth were told.
The state relied, his friends were told. 
Us all, and where I now am told 
Or gloriously served the world;
More lingeringly half the world.
The end of the mazurka, and 
To one whose soul has perished, and 
place opposite her at the table; she falls asleep, and 
The boa on her shoulders, and 
Together nudge Tatyana and
Hither to our frolic and 
maids’ song Come and form a circle and
Stanza //, Line 5. Ruslan and Ludmila: hero and
When his hot fingers touch her hand.
With a French volume in her hand.
Upon the chapters in your hand, 
The youth was called on every hand
Who sees the dark on every hand?
The pines, their boughs on every hand 
Truly, a beatific land.
His stables, forests, streams and land.
What more, my friends, do you demand? 
Of what is common, what is grand;
Inspired Mickiewicz used to stand 
There, wistful-eyed, behold her stand,
In still and somber beauty stand
He who could never understand
Place a proud vale at the end.
One whose warm kindness has no end —
5 There Mithridates sought his end.
Reread I cannot ... I must end . . .
Knyazhnin played ape there without end,
generation that preceded Pushkin’s. Katenin, a friend 
Pray say farewell as to a friend.
The voice of mistress, foe, and friend,
Long live Bordeaux, the faithful friend!
Orestes vied there with his friend,
Page 159. '^Orestes vied there with his friend”:
To my old nurse, my childhood’s friend;
There bold Fonvizin, freedom’s friend,
I’ll have a duel with my friend.
Long hours, the melodies I mend,
U pon your honor I depend.
These proud reflections all portend:
Your Madam Larina’s, I find,
We call it — if no trace I find 
The hopeful youth was quick to find 
The fiery glance, he could but find
Their voices, and their words were kind, 
Inscribing albums of this kind:
Yet, as a rule, despised mankind;
Young love, because it is so blind,
The poet’s ardent speech, the mind
Much to enchant his virgin mind.
”This silly landscape! Never mind;
With rebel will and lively mind.
First Spain was rocked by storm, and, second.
My Eugene was [Chadayev] second:
Great ladies, of whom he’d been fond; 
Is honor’s mainspring. I’ll be bound —
The ruts and ditches that abound
where’s your equal to be found?
side of Moscow, was the place where Napoleon found 
In dizzy circles round and round, 
The thing that makes the world go round.
The merry and monotonous round.
Wherever there is Russian ground.
To flute and viol’s merry sound.
The winter, Barclay, Russia’s God?
physiologist; Tissot: a French historian of the period.
from a famous watch-maker of the period.
Priest was a caricaturist of the period.
In praises of his hardihood;
Town that’s delivered to the flood,
How sad I find you! How you flood 
Nor distance, changed his earnest mood
When we were bowed beneath the rod 
Unless indeed we send a card
Her pet, Rossini, must be heard.
Tatyana looked as though she heard 
Would, tete-a-tete, where no one heard. 
Just for the sake of being heard.
Of his old uncle’s illness heard?
She lies as though she has not heard,
In token of our warm regard.
You’d find the way of vice was hard,
With French it’s spotted like a leopard —
He joins the throng on the boulevard^
xli Weaving his shoe of bast, the shepherd
Had Eugene, from a little bird.
They say that life does not afford
Onegin the cotillion. Lord!
How dismal to be sturdy. Lord,
The opera summons — in a word,
When guests are there, she says a word
No look, no tremor, not a word
Page after page, says not a word.
He bowed to her without a word.
Instruct the fair without a word.
He trembles, cannot say a word,
We yet attend upon the word
I read a shy, confiding word.
Upon ''ideal” — modish word —
No witty thought occurs, no word
separately, with the following Foreword:
Though innocent, are quite absurd.
Such bliss is transient, if absurd;
The press is thick, the hubbub loud.
The while she howls both long and loud;
With studied ways amused the crowd
And time would pass, and there would be
And my own man I want to be.
By a dark hope of what might be.
About his Olga; it may be.
Beneath the prudent flag of peace.
A poppy could not match your face.”
But where no more one meets his face . . .
At Whitsun, when the populace
And soon their tongues begin to race.
But to the garden let us race
All nonchalance and charm and grace,
As fancy in the lot would trace 
A passing thought’s enduring trace
And where he left a lasting trace.
Although its touch be soft as fleece.
Are turned by one cool glance to ice,
Archives of the Foreign Office.
Converse at ease, seem to rejoice.
A holy secret, and a voice 
A white cap shows, all in a trice:
And he will throw you in a trice.
At any gathering or dance,
And pride that ever looks askance.
And credit the world’s fair appearance; 
And lean upon it with assurance . . .
At cards with his inheritance!
And there a traveler from a distance,
And who, then, came to our assistance
And its cold white magnificence:
And I admit, in penitence,
And Tanya enters. Here her prince.
And then sat silent for the nonce.
Bloomed like a flower in the shade;
And crossed the girl, and as she made 
Ah, my poor Lensky, he was made 
Can shovel silver with a spade;
At that she could no longer hide
Displays her languor and her pride 
Because your honor and your pride 
At last he rouses, opens wide
Ah, whither, whither did you flee?
And raises fowls, while at his knee
By Fate’s imperious decree.
And behaved well, you will agree;
But left him bored to a degree,
Chapter Three
Could drain each morning bottles three.
Afar: the serpent and the tree 
And in these nobles he would see
And next the girl’s guitar we see;
And with enamored eyes to see
And his cheek pale, she does not see 
A country house he next may see —
And there’s a witch with a goatee,
Again, you’ll meet her, ’pon my life!”
But I became another’s wife;
"But tell me who she is.” "My wife.”
Abandoning his pleasant village.
But then he never read a page.
And prim young misses looking sage;
And breathe the free air of the stage,
But our Onegin’s out of range
But yet the pleasure’s dulled if he
And young in youth; blessed is he 
And think of it! So timid is he,
And my heart whispered: it is he!
artist. The author himself felt the justice of it, but he 
Although the house was empty, she 
And can you not forgive, if she
Are quite perplexed by such as she:
Decembrists. The saying has not been found in the 
Czar to France, where he began his service in the 
arrived among the savage Tauri, who were in the 
advantageous to readers, nevertheless injures the 
At the age of eighteen Annibal was sent by the
Beheld the bed where all must lie,
And yet her trust he’d not belie,
Desires that are too keen to slake.
And though he was an ardent rake,
A wretched ghost, a foreign joke
And every query, every tale,
And Strasbourg pies, imperishable;
A bleeding roastbeef’s on the table.
And such a crowd, a perfect rabble . .
But there’s no need that I dissemble
But fiery youth cannot dissemble
And guards in silence all the while
And cruel traitresses who smile.
And on her lips a careless smile.
But listens with an absent smile.
A young girl’s ardor, clear of guile.
As Lensky’s life that knew no guile,
By your good friend, all without guile,
Detractors, cowardly and vile,
Benedetta sia la madre: a Venetian baracarolle.
But, God, such boredom who would sample? —
As grateful as a kiss, as simple
dora, Thekla, are used only by the common people.
ballad of that title.
About the weather, flax, and cattle . . .”
Above her spinning-wheel’s low rattle;
But at eighteen that is the rule;
And kept him underneath her rule.
But find the North is not my style.
And fled afar . . . She followed me.
A decent chap — ^like you and me?
Befits and pleases you and me?”
And the grave eyes that have undone me
Although my freedom did not please me.
”Don’t think . . . but really . . . don’t accuse me . . .
”Ah, nurse, I know you won’t refuse me.”
But never mind the turn you gave me;
But you’re already dressed! God save me.
A word to solace and to save me:
And thought, I do not doubt, of me.
Another demon seizing me,
A mocking demon stirs within me
Are you a guardian angel to me?
A portrait of none else but me,
And those I do not greatly me;
And when consoled by art — and fame,
A swarm of thoughts exempt from blame.
And had no word for him but blame —
As rock and wave, or ice and flame.
Delphine: the leading character in a novel of the same 
Both friends and foes (they’re ail the same).
And you, can you remain the same?
And setting up a new regime;
Announces it is dinner-time.
But now adieu, oh, golden playtime!
am their neighbor.” ”Come, resume
Beside the window; on the pane 
And through the frosty window-pane
A halcyon bucolic scene,
Before, her bow was as serene.
All point to her, and all combine
And solitude — this was, in fine,
Drew up his regiments in line.
But, gentlemen, you may decline
And ardently this Muse of mine
All kin and kennels, crops and wine;
Bottles of cellar-cooled light wine:
A thing Albani might have done;
About the past, what’s done and gone; 
Although I’ve glanced at, in times gone,
And dashes uphill and is gone;
Across the meadowland alone,
And I’ve completed Chapter One.
As she says gently: ^^Rise; have done.
Bat have one things when you were gone^
But Eugene, now his friend was gone, 
Avails to rouse him: he is gone.
And with a somber splendor shone
Beneath the Finnish sky, alone.
And integers: ourselves alone.
And vainer labor there is none —
Chapter One
Commemorating one who’s gone;
A fop gone bald, toil’s arrant foe.
By a sly dodge or ready jape.
Congratulations! Now we are 
But Tasso’s murmured octaves are,
But curious, as maidens are,
Birch, linden, aspen, all are bare;
As on another road I fare.
As through the dust his horses fare.
A black-firocked monk, or if a hare
And Turkish pipes of amber rare,
All hope, for aye, who enter here.”
Come to eternal rest, lies here.”
• . . and there
Can a man do? Go walking there?
And plait his humble footgear there.
Affairs of state, and over there 
And carried to that region where
And locked him in a corner where
Beholding bareness everywhere.
Are just the same as what they were; 
But what w^as further to transpire 
Each detail of our friend’s attire.
Close as a marmot would require —
But let us rather now inquire
Between a rascal and a bore;
Admires alone Terpsichore 
And drop in stars upon the shore.
Come, it is time to dine once more.
A moment, and the pair once more
charm. One of our romantic writers found much more 
A barrier that is no more,
And turns to what is hers no more:
As my confession. Why say more?
Annibal’s curious life is known only from stories pre- 
A row of dinners, dull and sure,
A balalaika gives me pleasure,
At Christmas, carols were their pleasure;
But Tanya does not share our pleasure.
Dispatched his friend, and had his pleasure,
At peace, it is my artless pleasure
A song he brings for Tanya’s pleasure.
A pampered boy, allured by pleasure.
And boasted, bold beyond all measure. 
A clue to joys beyond all measure.
But you, Bordeaux, I always treasure
A housewife seems a perfect treasure!
Between her hours of toil and leisure
And curses their unwelcome leisure;
And also our calm hours of leisure.
Blase, growm tired of empty leisure.
A sweet remembrance to ensure.
A dwarf, whose tail is quite a feature,
Ashamed to own his every feature;
Below that other’s signature
Each rural mother hopes to capture.
Behold! from town arrives — what rapture!
But where Melpomene’s bold gesture
Anew the garrulous fond lyre?
Beneath their sky he plucked his lyre,
At once, and bear the weapon -case.
And roamed its gardens at my ease,
And all their w’ayward stirrings cease, 
A gentle sandy slope will please,
Approached her pillow, she would raise 
But as for me . . . my loving praise
(A bias worthy of our praise).
A Moslem in his paradise.
And as she reads, the tears will rise
And show commercial enterprise.
And staring in dismayed surprise,
Betrayed no anger, no surprise 
But, like a man of worth and sense,
Drives home to take his night’s repose,
At mere epistolary prose.
And the deep seas His praise rehearse
And healthless look, his dumb remorse — 
And when their wives talked, it was worse.
And urged along the outbreak’s course.
Above it all, the wild applause.
Do I thus give you an excuse?
And the rare magic of the Muse
century poet who aimed to amuse.
And the same pom, and the same spouse, 
And Russians too he would peruse:
Ah, yes, at some far distant date,
And suddenly he’s at the gate.
And all she looked on glistened white.
And fawn and play the hypocrite.
But just to tease your appetite;
Cannot eclipse her neighbor’s quite.
And cleverly convey a note.
complete biography of him. Footnote.)
Can this be she who long since wrote —
But whither in such anxious haste
And this routine was to his taste.
And having stared through my lorgnette
Beneath it: d. v. Annette”;
Accomplished as a vile coquette!
Another’s grief is hers to rue,
A nobler page, more fine and true,
And the fond fool would then pursue
And so inflexible their virtue.
Dirk, door, eclipse, fir, ghost, ice, knave, 
And day will brighten wold and wave,
Chapter Five
But he will back you while you live,
And, if my novel is to thrive.
And gulp them down as they arrive,
Are found absurd or else offensive 
By those whose parts are not extensive?
Although I find it so expressive.
Are roaring the recitative.
A dinner that was rather festive.
A lively horse, but not too restive,
above.
A lyre that bears a little dove;
authenticity, presiding over married love.
A tomb, a temple vowed to love,
At this unlucky moment, we
Afraid before the headsman’s axe.
Can it be Eugene? Truly? . . . Aye!
And so the guests would say good-bye.
Bowed lower, sought to catch her eye;
Disdain sits silent in his eye; 
Djc !|e
ELLE ETOIT FILLE, ELLE ETOIT AMOUREUSE.
His page is empty as can be.
From head to foot, in form or face.
For though the country boasts no palace,
From Kishinev to friends of Greece.
He noted with accustomed malice.
Forbidden fruits alone entice —
He thought it no great loss — perchance
French turns will please me in a sentence
For ravings that it may induce.
ently and was followed in the manuscript by a de- 
He let the classic laurel fade,
He did stop short of suicide.
Ennui pervading the haul monde.
His hair cut in the latest mode;
He dined, he danced, he fenced, he rode.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
From thoughts of him she is not firee;
Had brought the fruits of learning’s tree: 
For happiness. Good God! I see
Graved on the monument you see:
Grieves for the wretch throughout her life,
Found nothing fit to fill his life.
Himself, his dinner, and his wife.
Exhibiting the present age,
Education; he was a stickler for purity in language. 
estate at Mikhailovskoe. In a letter to his brother he 
Given to mournful reverie.”
Emboldened by his Olga’s smile,
He offers all a grand example;
Eugene perused the sad epistle;
Forgive the tears you wring from me,
Good neighbor who’s dropped in on me,
For dreams, and would have been a shame.
For gossip is not held a crime.
Farewell, you friendly skies of home;
Eugene
Here not a wit was found to shine
For such mere trifles? Why repine 
Esteemed emotion, feeling none.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
For lady never, no, not one.
He scorned most men (not every one).
From Istamboul may not be here.
God grant you find some trifle here
For Eugene to behold him there 
For he is welcome everywhere.
Extolling you in tones of fire!
Eugene alone was framed to measmre
Even Didelot becomes a bore.”
His spirit knew their lyric jSre.
Find life a function to endure.
For glory will be hers, and treasure!”
Forth rushes greedy youth to capture 
Guillot is standing, ill at ease.
Here’s every dainty that you please:
Gold pines, and live Limburger cheese.
From his affection; they were these:
For the most costly merchandise 
Fate had arranged it otherwise.
Give way in turn to common sense:
His illness — ^name it how you choose,
Goes out at once, demands a horse.
He is the victim of remorse.
every capital so as to show the Europeans "un russe 
Gone with the styles we do not use,
First snow, and delicately wrote 
He caught the post with eager haste,
His early years were all a waste.
From that dull hole . . And his lorgnette
He paid the Muses honor due;
His sentiments were fine and true.
Finding my youthful dream come true —
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Free from digressions Chapter Five.
Far back to a lost spring, and we.
Enlightenment makes such as we 
HORACE
Kishinev in the autumn of 1822 to his brother; "/e
In judgment on himself could be 
How very welcome you will be.”
Its passage, it has ceased to be.
His bride was soon content to be 
Her well-bound quarto to inscribe,
I fain would write a diatribe —
Inflames the girl’s conceited face;
Her rosy innocence and grace.
I see the pain has left no trace;
Is there a sign of tears? No trace! 
His worn shoe slipping on the ice,
I hear the magic of your voice,
Had shown to my enchanted glance 
I am not given to repentance —
liii With friends and foes come from a distance
In 1812 ? The folk’s resistance,
Her dreams in every circumstance 
Is it because intelligence
Have acted with intelligence.
I court the Muse with indolence.
He killed eight years thus like a dunce —
He curses women’s whim with force.
I first saw young Tatyana glide 
His drowsy eyes, and draws aside 
Here is a door — ^he flings it wide,
Inane and petty, while the ode
In dread of what this might forebode;
In festive crowds, in solitude.
'^Just look . . . that man . . . he’s one of three 
In that swift moment one could see
In the thick grass where none can see,
Her gauzy veil aside to see 
”I should most dearly like to see.”
I have them here for you to see:
It is my letter, don’t you see.
In cosy scenes of fireside life.
He’d led a kind and simple life;
In gossip finds the spice of life,
He loved me, and the dawn of life
I shall be true to him through life.”
Held Richardson as dear as life.
In such a year, at such an age;
He lived in quite another age);
He left his rustics to their tillage,
His epitaph is plain as he;
Himself so deep in it that he 
Her cheek rests on her hand, and she
Her sister tempts the Muse, not she.
heroines of two of Pushkin’s narrative poems: ''The 
"Inspired Mickiewicz”: Adam Mickiewicz, the
kin was traveling in the Crimea in 1820 he visited the 
husband in the mirror, and to learn his name from the 
Is like Van Dyck’s Madonna. Fie!
Like silver dust the snowflakes lie.
In our poetic reverie
Its classic grace draws in its wake
Has thrilled by night the silent dale.
Like fellowship, as I regale 
”0h, there will be a dreadful babble,
I know that life is but a bubble,
Lensky was thought an eligible,
It all pours forth from lips that tremble
I know your heart; I need not tremble.
I love you (why should I dissemble?)
Has she the answer to the riddle
I moved there also for a while,
Her lowered eyes agleam the while,
Indeed, you played a noble role:
lx My novel finds me in good fettle
He savors the few words that settle
Is all they give us as a rule,
H’m, h’m! dear reader, pray apprise me.
I loved, and nothing could relieve me. 
I trust that you will pardon me;
It suits my Muse as it suits me.
It was he came to visit me.
It humbly asks romantic fame.
I have no care for flighty fame;
His neighbor, calling out his name,
I sadly call on each sweet name.
He loved the dark and shunned the daytime,
[ix] In these lone steppes an exile’s home.
He did not die or go insane.
Her look, so candid and serene.
Julie, Clarissa, or Delphine;
In shouting fiercely: ^^Mine! She’s mine!”
Highways to make the country one.
"I am in love; leave me alone.”
Her heart was filled with one alone.
Imagine: here I am alone.
It waited on, for him alone;
I thought to paint (see Chapter One)
I must say candid words or none.
Istomina on lifted toe.
In vain she struggles to escape;
I watched her spouse, with time to spare;
He does not cease his stubborn stare:
If she encountered, unaware,
have been printed; we are reproducing them here, 
He seems, indeed, an alien here,
He seems to see his Olga there
I did not ache with such desire
It is to parch with hot desire^
In triumph at the joyous shore;
I’ve finished cantos nine, no more;
In that same hamlet where of yore 
If for a moment I found pleasure
His pocket burns: it holds a treasure,
Here in the world’s benumbing rapture, 
I The taw^dry glitter of her vesture.
His enemies were always base.
Indulge in lovers’ dreams with ease;
He was not one to pick and choose.
How blessed, indeed . . . though she might choose
I liked, and his peculiar pose;
I was embittered, he morose.
In hacked as well as hackneyed verse 
Himself transformed into a horse;
In gentle whispers with her nurse.
He now repents him of the course
I shall lose patience soon, of course:
Hoping her grief might thus abate;
Is snatched away from her by Fate
He’d had a glimpse of his estate;
He has it still — a touching note,
He said, and found his words the cue
In billiards, with a good blunt cue 
Have paid to folly what’s her due.
I’ll give the censorship its due.
Important folk, and is it true 
I marveled at their iron virtue,
Its reckless growth: into the grave 
In cantos numbering twenty -five!
He loves you ... as a relative!
Had marked the place; and, more attentive, 
Life was a riddle he would solve.
In reverie they would dissolve;
His whims; 0 hover thou above 
He was a veteran in love.
His precious Olga: such is love!
Her languor will not let her move.
Heloise; Clarissa: the heroine of Clarissa Harlotve; 
IV Five versts away from Krasnogorye,
liULFILATRE
Mute anger only marks her face . . .
My Lensky’s fury grows apace;
Let’s call some time. Take my advice;
Loves elbow-room and thrusts us hence?
Line 9, The poet is presumably referring to Prince
’Mid maids and matrons seems to glide
Like to the moon in lonely pride.
Must in this matter be your guide.
minor poet and author of an essay in praise of the ode.
Long since with sweet disquietude
Move plates and chairs with ready glee,
My friends. Perhaps, by heaven’s decree,
My Muse to a superb soiree;
Line 10. The emblems of the classical stage.
Like pale Lenore, by moonlight she
Lines 8-14. Pushkin spent eight years on the
Line 9. Two Petriads: poems about Peter the
(Lepage’s work), and has him tie 
My little nook do not forsake;
Lo! the opinion of the rabble
Meanwhile, forget all toil and trouble,
Light nothings, spoken without guile 
May speak, like a fond friend, of me.
My mournful secret you will shun me:
My stricken heart cries out and fails me
My letter to Onegin.” ”Bless me,
''My second?” Eugene said, "Permit me;
May wear the laurel -crown of fame,
My labors, yet perhaps this name 
Line 13. Breguet: a repeater which took its name
Love your own self and so have done!
My heart to one, and one alone!
Myself mistaken, did not dare 
My fair Russian Terpsichore?
Let not the poet’s heart know capture
Long since, but notice if you please 
Like fire, the gilded crosses rise 
My thanks, friend, you will not refuse.
Monsieur Finemouche, friend of the house, 
Men’s malice and the stroke of Fate.
My stanza, saved by jealous fate,
Me if you must: I can’t translate.
My Moscow offered Bonaparte —
Like any illness: spleen, or plague;
Like madness make us wild and vague;
Mile-posts rejoice the idle eye,
NASCE UNA GENTE A CUI L’MORIR NON DOLE.
Only a dream? It could not be!
Or in the end will he just be
She would not win you by her face,
Onegin’s form, Onegin’s face.
Prepare with him to leave the place 
Onegin, that familiar place.
She at a table took her place
So exquisite as sacrifice;
Oh, Brenta! I shall yet rejoice
Page 160. trepak'^: a boisterous peasant dance.
Pursued with so much elegance;
Of destiny and its defiance.
Of some imported wild romance. 
The fear, the shame, are past endurance . . .
Surrendered his inheritance;
stay in Odessa, Pushkin struck up an acquaintance 
Of good and evil, and of science,
Show rapture or indifference,
Since time, without my interference,
Or burn with sudden eloquence!
Our hero, lived not so long since.
The flower of life that blooms but once.
Remembering the past, perforce 
not all of which it seemed necessary to reproduce 
Or it may be his martyred shade
Now five steps more the pair have made.
"stc/ii” (or shchee) : a vegetable soup, usually made
Pontus, who committed suicide.
On through the field the girl will ride, 
Stanza XXI Line 10, The reference is to Childe
Once graced the devil’s own abode,
Or brought his longing quietude.
Seemed sunk in gloom, or bold and free.
Or does not care; and all agree 
(Such is the sex, you will agree);
Of that lost hour beneath the tree 
The fathers, indeed all, could see
"No.” "Gladly.” "When?” "At once. You’ll see
She asks: ”The left? What’s there to see?”
One has a cock’s head plain to see,
She cries: ^'Whom, Tanya, did you see?”
Not what you have, but what you see 
Than this: a household where the wife 
Old monkeys of another age 
of cabbage.
Observe his closet well, and gage
Romances, upon every page 
Of curses: he’s gone home to change.
Rests on the smoky streams, and he 
Some dunce may yet pronounce as he 
She whispered to herself: ’Tis he!
"She sat beside the window. She
She’s at the window — always she! . . .
plan of the whole composition; for, as a result, the 
Stanza XXV, Line 5. Chadayev (Chaadayev): the
Page 163. "Shouts bravo in his sleep”: in the
Stanza LVII^ Lines 9-10, The reference is to the
sky, a minor poet, who was living in Odessa at the 
On your protection till I die . . .
Reveillez-vous^ belle endormie.
Of old the ballroom used to shake 
Of heels the stout parquet would quake,
Of feasts and sundry foods and eke 
Of prejudice’s ancient yoke,
The dead man buried, they were able
The floor is oak; two chests, a table,
The furnishings are plain and stable.
Of course, one should reward his gabble
The English spleen it may resemble,
On plucking the two-headed eagle 
That only once in a great while.
One saw the cheerful morning smile;
on the Black Sea, when the author was in quasi-exile.
Stanza X, Line 4, Julie: the heroine of La Nouvelle
Revived the grandeur of Corneille;
Released j&:om the damp cork, the bottle
Tatyana’s letter lies before me,
No more can hoyden rhymes detain me,
Tatyana’s letter Or but a tempter to undo me?
That silently you spoke to me.
Of Olga’s looks alive to me.
No, passion never wrought for me
Tanya, my dear, your looks distress me.”
Rich empty rooms Onegin came 
Tatyana was her sister’s name:
Or prose and verse — ^in naught the same.
of approval current in Russia at the time.
Stanza XX/JJ, Line 5. Malvine: a novel by Mme.
She waits: when will the answer come? 
Ovid, who found, so far from Rome,
Seeing the molten wax assume
Reveals herself in every scene;
Noise, chatter, on the table shine
She said "Akulka” for Celine;
Praskovya she would call '^Pauline”;
”Sit down, mon angeS ”My dear Cousine!'^
Sang for the guests across the wine,
Over a friendly glass of wine.
Stanza XLII, Line 8. ^^This means,” observes one
Stanza XXI I ^ Lines 6-14. It is believed that one
She can no more, her strength is gone*
Shy as the doe who runs alone.
On everything and everyone:
O’er Petersburg’s dark pavements borne 
She hurries, but the dreadful shape
Pelt the lad with cherries ripe.
Stanza XXI I ^ Line 13. With us, fortune -books are
Perfumes in crystal cut with care;
Out of the window she may stare —
Now nearer! Galloping . . . and here 
That Ovid sang, that brought him here, 
Open the window; come, sit here.”
Polish poet, visited the Crimea in 1825, and there 
Runs to the poor youth lying there.
She will not find her meadows there.
Not knowing in the morning where
Stanza XVIIL Fonvizin and Knyazhnin were
No, when with youth and love on fire,
She halted, like one scorched by fire. 
On the far bank the smoky fire
Of park and palace, dome and spire,
Should giddy deity desire
Of the Black Sea upon the shore.
Or climbing down the rocky shore.
The first gay snowflakes spin once more
That you should scorn me, or ignore.
She stifles here . . . her heart is sore.
Nor, from the loge and the parterre,
”No, nobody! You’re quite secure,
Of loves that to the grave endure;
Only the faznily, I’m sure.
Revenge was something of a pleasure,
Prophetic of a priceless pleasure,
Once lechery that took its pleasure
Since infancy her only pleasure
Plunged into sadness beyond measure. 
The good wdfe took her husband’s measure. 
Of course you’ve often seen that treasure.
Scrawled over by her friends at leisure
One is a horned and dog-faced creature,
poetry in them than in the whole of French literature. 
Stanza IX. The girl is supposed to see her future
That time and change may not erase.
The baker’s German and precise.
So pious are they, so precise.
Now cut the ice with scraping noise;
So elegantly can devise 
Tell fortunes, too, but otherwise:
Not deep or learned or intense.
Our native tongue turns up its nose
Nor studies such as pedants choose,
No savoir vivre^ no hint of verse;
Sleepless, Tatyana would converse 
She loves him still; and in remorse,
That could not very well be worse.
One finger’s frostbitten, of course.
She gazes at him without pause . . .
The breath of life would then infuse.
Something more certain to amuse.
That poets owe imto the Muse,
Of elegies at some far date 
Of comme il faut — Shishkov, berate 
Pages and sent to Finland to serve as a private.
Some, prey to piles, or Aphrodite;
Or letters that a girl might write.
Of wintry pleasures; you will dote 
On balls I also used to dote:
Perhaps ’twill please you if I quote 
The heart of the confirmed coquette!
So he returned, took Chatzky’s cue.
Our time will come when it is due,
Or sweetly use the flatterer’s tongue;
Of her companions in the blue.
Off in the wilds — ^is it not true? — 
She finds; abyss, ape, bear, bridge, cave,
On us the favors that men crave;
Of that dread mystery, the grave;
Shall know the secrets of the grave,
Some pages held a sharp incentive
Tatyana goes, impelled by love.
Proceed, my tale! Here’s matter for ye,
Tatyana’s trouble; but each eye 
She’d watch its flight with anxious eye.
Revealing to their haughty gaze
Onegin, but she seems to freeze 
The hallowed letters O and E.
years of Anna’s reign, nominally considered to be 
The clouds before him — can it be?
The young and hopeful brides-to-be,
Volcanic Naples broke the peace,
While I lie lapped in rural peace!
Ye vanished tumults, rest in peace!
With a fine mind and handsome face;
Upon a fair Venetian face,
Where Tanya met him face to face.
The scene where first I saw your face,
The two old women weep, embrace.
Within the gondola’s embrace
To utter, yet she’d not a trace.
To make the soul of man rejoice 
With a feigned chill in look and voice. 
You looked in at the house just twice
The happy man who took no chance
They eye our heroine askance.
The vista of a free romance!
Whom, at the start of our romance,
the poet’s slovenly appearance.
The servants gave him all assistance,
(You will recall the circumstance)?
Was yet a thorough Russian; hence
The talk would turn with strange persistence
Upon the bachelor’s sad existence;
That scarce had heard of his existence, 
There Muravyov showed pluck and force,
These spoke to her with silent force.
While in the garden’s lavish shade 
With her Onegin at her side —
The lively Muse was at my side
To crowding slaves on every side?
Took wilful passion for my guide;
Torment the rhymesters a la mode.
Upon my dreaming soul intrude.
The whole day through in solitude.
The fields’ and forests’ solitude
Unknown to butterfly and bee.
They come, they conquer, and they flee.
Their conquests and their pranks with glee;
The snow is reaching to her knee;
There may the lyre sound clear and free,
Your way in soulful flight and free.
The sly thrall struggle to be free.
Upon the boards still flutter free,
The men who’d set the peasants free.
Three ladies mention a soiree.
The truth, and, God be praised, can see 
To Lensky’s wrath: he would not see
With him the humble road of life.
Whose satisfactions were, through life, 
With its unseasonable strife 
Would dream of walking, bride and wife.
Who, yawning, with his friends and wife.
To friend and child and faithful wife;
Without affairs, or rank, or wife,
While, on the other hand, his wife
whom he loved and who was slain by a jealous wife.
You, you alone would be my wife.
Were ladies of a certain age,
Were proper people to engage;
To praise the dancer now the rage,
Thereby our eighteen-year -old sage.
There are no inns. In a cold cottage
You scarce can get a dish of pottage:
Take rest, young poet, as thy wage.”
The princess, pale, in neglige.
who, at a distance, swam after the ship in which he 
The pen makes mock of such as he.
That at Very’s on credit he 
To 0 . . . our neighbor. Oh, but he
When his poor head began to ache;
The simple lines there graven, she 
There is no sleep for such as she.
XXXIX Sometimes a kiss as fresh as she,
Winter, the sorceress, ’tis she!
'Tn all the jealous crowd, what she
written by Ozerov, a dramatist who belonged to the 
To call it dirty is no lie.
With silver hoar, the meadows lie . . • 
Upon a succulent fat pie
They touch the springs of reverie.
You, figments of sweet reverie.
Who neither crack nor are a joke!
Their meetings passed; in turn they spoke
The cattle low; the nightingale
To grasp things . . . But you’re growing pale;
You, readers, with another tale:
Their news, their gossip — all arc stale.
To do full justice to the table,
Xli There was something intelligible
The time run on, and in the middle
With the coarse salt of malice, while 
Thinking of Eugene all the while.
To decent folk, and with a smile.
With skill and passion, touch and smile.
The strait-laced innocent beguile 
XXlll Was gentle Olga — ^in her dimple
the shores of Africa and taken to Constantinople. 
You rustic Priams, and you gentle
Thoughts of the future made him whistle;
The herd no longer drives his cattle,
With tea and jam, and endless tattle
Then let each man be on his mettle:
The plan I had no pains to settle,
Whom silence was about to throttle,
The kindly fates had fancied me.
These artless lines can never bore me.
You might be pleased — if so, advise me —
Was it not you who gently gave me
To no one, friends, you must believe me:
To let the tender habit seize me;
XXxix God, what can he think of me?”
Would gallop side by side with me!
To play a game of cards with me,
You may expect no less firom me;
The years to rugged prose constrain me.
When a fine lady seeks to win me 
What difference does that make to me?
Will it no more return to me?
That ladies’ feet have had for me.
When once the breath of spring assails me, 
XXVll If fault there be, you will acquit me
When Tanya’s tender message came;
When into the hushed study came 
Went raving mad or worse: became 
The thirst for knowledge, toil, and fame.
We both had wearied of the game;
The dread of vice, the fear of shame.
To poetry’s exalted flame;
The hearts of both now spurned the flame
Upon Zarema? To the same 
Until Breguet’s unsleeping chime
To his estate about this time 
vous observerai seulement que moins on aime une femme
Your spouse awaits; come to me, come! . . .”
The fair young pilgrim must go home.
To take the awful cargo home.
The woods, Tatyana stayed at home,
That he must have a change of scene
They are so clever, so serene.
The hearth breathes warmth, and all’s serene;
Then buzzing, all sit down to dine.
”Yes, after all these years. Aline!”
They cross themselves, their heads incline,
The tender verse. Princess Pauline;
What shipments are in quarantine?
When there’s no duty on the wine?
Were set upon those casks of wine.
To liken do-re-mi to wine.
Therewith a bottle of light wine,
To find a Moscow magazine
Where is he? Y'es, I know the one.”
To -write in French . , . What’s to be done? 
'T am not known here. He is gone . . .
Tatyana, dreaming, walked alone.
With Eugene, and with him alone.
Upon her balcony alone
Where moonlight silvered shrub and stone, 
Will halt her horse beside the stone,
That does not frighten anyone
This insult was not to be borne.
The rogue, who somehow would escape 
That’s where the eligibles are!”
The pencil-marks he made with care
111 which Tatyana ought to share
The younger beauties will declare
The version of it given here 
' ’Vladimir Lensky slumbers here.
The door swings wide, and Lensky’s here,
Would be dismayed to see him there;
To hear the vulgar chatter there.
To plunge their tinkling pitchers there,
time of Pushkin’s enforced stay there.
Upon the pages everywhere 
Through lofty tree-tops everywhere;
The faces one meets everywhere;
You should perceive udth eye severe 
To Tanya of the days that were;
The blood that burns tmth frantic fire;
The ladies sit beside the fire;
What’s said beside the fading fire.
The double windows, the snug fire;
To a toilette you must admire,
The haughty creatures may inspire
The girls, off by themselves, conspire;
To masquerade in male attire.
With every church in bright attire.
”You are the one that I adore.
Were it not better, if before
Those gentle hands were stained with gore
Than halt bewildered on the shore.
Upon the nameless river’s shore
The helpless girl can do no more
Who loves you more may write yet more.”
What does my future hold in store?”
The courtyard white, a white parterre,
Two hearts, a torch, and flowers, be sure, 
Tatyana thrills with pain and pleasure
The news gives Tanya little pleasure.
The lofty passion, the pure pleasure
XI The local gentry’s round of pleasure
Vli Trochaic from iambic measure,
Then disappointed beyond measure, 
To let the worldlings take the measure
’^There peasants, rich beyond all measure.
Was bored again beyond all measure; 
To the low roof to fetch her measure 
They liked to tread a country measure;
Would ravish one who prized the treasure
Where should I seek a dearer treasure?
XIX Each object seems a priceless treasure,
The placid course of rustic leisure;
The village, where Onegin’s leisure
To wander by the lake at leisure,
"Why do you say so?” "Not a feature 
’Tis yet more pleasant if the creature
"You love the younger? Curious creature!”
The oysters? They have come! In rapture
The strains of Albion’s proud lyre 
Within me — they have found surcease:
While Cicero could scarcely please;
The modern Russian’s worst disease.
To leave such quiet haunts as these 
While round the tents that nomads raise
To hear a people’s hymn of praise.
Who’s had three thousand years of praise.
Up to its roof was past all praise. 
x4nd found his chains a thing to praise.
Your charm? My verses sang your praise; 
Without them, there’s no paradise.
That forms the ducklings’ paradise.
We scared patrols with blatant noise;
Went off and talked in solemn wise;
Vladimir made a dry response 
The arms are crossed — a well-known pose —
The hat is cocked, the brow morose.
Who fathered the vast universe.
Your grief wall bring me to remorse?
You know the truth? What is the use 
The noses blown, and without pause.
Youth’s fever is its own excuse 
You venerator of the Muse
The blow of a malignant fate.
The hours allotted me by Fate,
Will tell the story of your fate.
Who hear November at the gate.
The columns of the city gate
When he had come, and if, of late.
The word is one I can’t translate:
The war, the snow-fall, and his mate.
The wolf beside his hungry mate.
Who best knows how to separate.
The lies that journals perpetrate,
They settled dowm on his estate.
The wretched story out, complete —
With those Chateaubriand could write;
They’re duller than the things we write.
Vladimir too had odes to write,
Was one that I found exquisite.
There’s little here that’s exquisite.
The lovelorn boy ignored them quite.
The driver on his box we note
The very words Onegin wrote.
To me all this is naught. This minute
Though now a light of no repute.
The street-lamps’ pallid substitute.
Yet all is well — each has its due:
When they employed the mother-tongue;
Will not your soul be filled with rue
Those lovely lips; is it not true?
With a gay jest and words untrue.
XIV I am unworthy of your virtue;
They learned, and we, before we leave.
Their judgment both men freely gave.
The tender feelings and the brave?
The thoughts of youth so high and grave.
Upon the threshold of his grave.
The race of men recks nothing, save
Would, in a body, call at eve.
Two hearts, one may perhaps believe.
Yet grieve for him . . . But wherefore grieve?
To talk and sigh, to jest or grieve
Those fleshy anchorites alive 
To one who is but half-alive:
You smooth his pillow and contrive
Then what a poem I’ll contrive 
XVI Its vogue — since we are not progressive.
the Crimea, erected by him in memory of a captive 
When springtime’s sun shines warm above: 
The tongue of Petrarch and of love.
The languor and the flame of love 
Their pangs, and he, remote from love,
whom Pushkin was at one time in love.
The time had come — she was in love.
Your own young days. Were you in love?”
To sleep upon the stove.
"When did he get here, by the bye?
The housekeeper a slow good-bye;
The couple stood, to say good-bye.
With solemn gait and sparkling eye.
Where he had met her ravished gaze.
Toward the moon her languid gaze,
The Kalmucks’ flocks, contented, graze. 
Your Phyllis, whom you idolize.
Thick coffee Orientals prize:
The storms which shook it like a leaf
He may pick up her handkerchief.
Though I was worthy your belief,
It may not be: without relief,
With sorrow, but her tears were brief.
And it is precious, being brief:
Or was the time of sorrow brief?
I have no tears, in spite of grief;
Impulsiveness may lead to grief.”
Where did her sister take her grief?
IX Can scarce be faithful to her grief.
Comes up to carry Olga off.
was being carried off.
And now Zaretzky measures off
The enemies their mantles doff.
And thought he met with no rebuff.
A way for her; he’s happy if 
And trusted her with house and pelf,
He wore a dressing-gown himself;
Stanza XXXII, Line 11. Zizi: Yevpraxiya Wulf,
was closely related to his ancestors.” He meant, of 
the last chapter of Eugene Onegin 'eight’ instead of 
Of my young friend I sing, and of
And she will learn my knowledge of
Are in them, and the sparkle of 
”But, nurse, you still can tell me of
His friend unburdened himself of —
reputed ruins of the tomb of Mithridates, the king of 
Then fell again to talking of
And blessed the man who rids him of 
called fountain of tears, in the palace of the Khan of 
unquestionably among the most distinguished men of 
Prisoner of the Caucasus,” and "The Fountain of 
a liberal temper, the second having the reputation of 
who held various posts, including that of Minister of 
Stanza X/X, Lines 12-14, The statuette is of
Line 10. On his mother’s side, the author is of
some misdemeanor, he was expelled from the Corps of 
Stanza XXXI, Line 9. Yazykov: a lyricist of
eighteenth-century playwrights, the first a satirist of 
The cab, to spare the feeble nag.
The ox with lowered horns must drag
And gave his neighbor’s ribs a dig.
Asked who she was, set straight his wig,
His music therewith sweetly c h im i ng;
A heart that had not felt a pang —
He watched her as she played and sang;
To long to clasp your knees, and, throbbing
Appeal, complaint, confession, sobbing 
And the young city miss who’s facing
A summer in the country, racing 
This estimable friend embracing.
Just as the stars had left off dancing.
To Eugene, who at once goes dancing 
Tatyana might be found romancing
My lively cousin now advancing.
And all seemed dull. But soon the reading
Her father saw no harm in reading
(He was a decent chap, conceding 
A man of sense, I am conceding,
The volumes at long last succeeding 
Onegin’s holy life; unheeding,
No other entertainment needing.
XXV Why should one quarrel with good breeding?
And in an attitude confiding,
There the Petrovsky Palace, hiding
You haunts where I might stay in hiding. 
Pour from the boughs where she is hiding. 
The ladies enter; now it’s gliding 
He leads her, nonchalantly gliding.
Yes, but your horse will soon be sliding,
More horrors: here a lobster riding
Night falls; the moon, already riding
On the bleak steppe go horseback-riding?
Stands grim and grand, morosely priding
XVll A goose’s snaky neck bestriding —
The terraced scene, the view unfolding 
Ah, friends, how I rejoiced, beholding
She clambered up a hill, commanding
The throng with a mute eye commanding?
Near by, she saw the mansion standing.
But in a corner who is standing,
serving in Siberia. Empress Elizabeth, on ascending 
By the still stream, with dusk descending.
He holds a stocking he was mending;
Upon those lines of bis commending 
Of welcome are indeed heart-rending.
But I, my friend, am not contending
XV The dancers from the green were wending.
For 1808 without a binding:
They sought to make love’s ties more binding 
Onegin searched the cupboards, finding
And what was my amazement, finding
Our troikas tireless, forward bounding.
Abruptly down the incline bounding,
xlii To the mazurka; with the pounding
Within, you hear the feet still pounding.
xl Her shaken heart to stop its pounding,
But now the heavy hammer’s pounding
No sooner did the cannon, sounding
Now the mazurka’s strains are sounding.
The coughs, the shouts and hisses sounding.
Tatyana hears the chorus sounding,
The city soon will wear resounding
Our dapper coachmen are astounding,
And, seated, eagerly is eyeing
VI On secret or on open chaffing.
^^High time she w^ed!” But I am dragging 
The neighbors’ heads and tongues are wagging:
In endless reverie indulging,
And modern man’s true soul divulging:
Her fondness for them never changing.
Among her groves and meadows ranging.
He sees the self-willed Terek flinging
Responding to his hasty ringing.
And now for the first time I’m bringing
His dressing-gown and slippers bringing,
But in their praises why be stringing
Oh, once again will you be singing
Our songs, but are not worth the singing. 
VI And jealous fears my heart are stinging
2 Ahead, a royal eagle winging;
For me? Shall I yet see you winging 
Where are the storms of love and longing.
I shall recall the tongue of longing.
And to my lips the words came thronging;
And you, bright phantoms round him thronging,
Like Venus’ very self emerging.
To prink and preen he’d ask no urging,
XVl She drops her eyes, her heart is aching.
Glass after glass is drained in drenching
XVii They’ve raised a thirst there is no quenching.
A rustic view that she found fetching,
In ink or colors he is sketching
A serf-boy takes his dog out sleighing,
Here an ambassador was weighing 
The rings are plucked; each maiden, sighing, 
All’s hushed: within the parlor, sighing
Dressed early, shadow-pale, and sighing,
And sadly, virginally sighing,
At last she rose, and gently sighing
He well knew how to set you laughing.
The loud finale sounds, and pushing,
19 Into the square the crowd is rushing,
We think good wishes are the thing.
A Moscow winter was the thing.
Of some attractive little thing.
Downhill she_trudges, scarcely breathing.
Her mind with agitation seething,
Stanza XLII. This entire ironic stanza is nothing
Two minutes passed with neither speaking,
He’ll then resume till day is breaking
And leaves the little hovel shaking , . . 
For all the efforts she is making.
Tatyana is alone; but making 
Her grief into the garden taking,
Xll Since now her uhlan was betaking
Consumed with terror, Tanya, quaking,
He came. And her eyes opened. Quaking,
He goes in to the princess, quaking;
By afternoon he will be waking.
VVll Alas, in dreams, asleep or waking,
Not long the Larin house was waking
Tatyana, terror-struck, is waking . . »
About the self-same thing, this clacking 
’’Stop crying, stop this tiresome quacking 
Young timid love, and that was shocking. 
He sighs: ^'They’re past the age — it’s shocking! 
First: he accused himself of mocking
He hows to sundry friends; his mocking
xil ''You wrote me. There is no use seeking
^Took quickly to the left.” But balking.
She fancied ghosts behind her stalking.
Should cross her path while she was walking, 
In uniform . . . Now he is walking 
The aunts, of one thing only thinking.
Appears, his broom in hand, still blinking;
I take a stroll. Now cups are clinking
XVI She hears wild shouts and glasses clinking
The pail is brought, the ice is clinking
xlv This is what poets should be drinking
Recovered, Tanya, pale and shrinking,
Each to the other slyly winking,
Tatyana burned and shivered, asking:
No matter. Why should we be asking
’’He’s coming?” But in silence basking.
The sea, the southern sun for basking . . .
Revenge approaches, so, concealing
xLll Her passive hands; her pain concealing,
The stove with colored tiles, appealing
A smile, Onegin is appealing 
She found the margins most appealing:
Had he been quicker in revealing —
Were all unconsciously revealing:
Upon her heart, as though a rumbling 
And sinks from sight, soon to be crumbling. 
Says Tanya, ^'Nay, I am not grumbling:
A snowball down the hill goes tumbling
And as he reads, both thought and feeling
Yes, deep within I had the feeling.
XI That he was yet a man of feeling.
In the soft luxury of feeling,
What petty thought? What trivial feeling? 
I looked for peace in prayer, kneeling.
Aroused your pity then . . . You’re kneeling 
She does not raise him, leaves him kneeling;
Or when, the world about me reeling,
Like a poor sot to shelter reeling
XXXvii Imagination is unreeling
And where two pines their shadows fling
Xvii ”What ails you, Tanya?” ^^Oh, it’s trifling,
'T cannot sleep, nurse; it is stifling!
For four long years she had been ailing.
Thinks sadly: ''Why am I not ailing.
Say, from a bullet-wound? Or failing.
They’d come to an old aunt, now failing —
If out of date, the lofty ceiling.
He listened to young Lensky, smiling:
I hate red lips that are unsmiling,
And likewise do not find beguiling
XV So immature and so beguiling.
Both love and malice scarce recalling, 
XXlll His friend Onegin by recalling
XVi Upon Ms beaver collar falling.
Though he pursued, the chase was palling; 
The husband enters: the appalling
And for the simple churchyard, telling
She halted at the gate-way, telling
Tanya prepared for fortune- telling
XXI And came to the abandoned dwelling
X And in the bath-house, not the dwelling.
Of jdowers, for our modest dwelling.
Now Olga sits before it, filling
The lustrous tea-cups, never spilling 
Ausonia’s happy sons are trilling 
A merry tune that, all unwilling,
I frighten the wild ducks by rolling
Or else (joking aside) while strolling
A wind -mill all alone is whirling.
Like giddy youth forever swirling
xli The waltz sends tireless couples twirling
Its wings with crazy motions twirling;
When, wrapped in storm, shall I be battling
The billows, while the shrouds are rattling, 
xlii (The reader waits the rhyme -word: beaming.
Would fail to show Diana gleaming,
The frosts begin to snap, and gleaming
At dusk the samovar is gleaming
He did not stir, but like one dreaming
We yielded to delicious dreaming.
XXXll The blood from the fresh wound was steaming;
And as it hisses, gently steaming.
Together in the forest gloaming;
And one would find the children roaming
behind their backs, while he alone was free, swimming 
I burned, my pulses started drumming.
His news sets girlish hearts to drumming:
Once more Tatyana’s heart is drumming;
A regimental band is coming!
III As she reviews Onegin’s coming
The moment that I saw you coming,
That silly moon you see there looming.”
Your Olga’s face, so round and blooming.
Soon the dry valleys will be blooming;
A delicate green down assuming.
And, fortune’s darling, in his rhyming
Has sent you, and I shall be leaning 
At whiles, upon their elbow's leaning,
One clownish fellow, idly leaning
All my past life has had one meaning —
Against a door, remarks with meaning 
And ponder each move’s secret meaning.
A mirror on the moon, now waning;
of death, while Pussy foretells a wedding. Its opening 
O’er her embroidery, designing 
his estates, where he lived throughout the remaining 
If there had been a hope remaining
I first resolved upon refraining
And, careless of the cold, is training
Tufted with snow; the stars are shining 
There, when the tardy moon was shining. 
In the unruj63ed heavens shining;
While winter’s carpet, softly shining.
Nor was she found with head inclining
He sang of parting and repining;
In secret Tanya was repining;
But none as yet came near divining
The road is lost and past divining.
The frost-work o’er the panes was twining;
Two girls would come, and sadly twining 
The call to early labors dinning;
When the deep shades of night are thinning:
A monarch weak and also cunning,
Whom fame had, by strange chance, been sunning.
So Tanya bit by bit is learning
Vlll And day by day in pensive yearning
Of course young Lensky felt no yearning
Long since her dreams had set her yearning
At last for whom her heart is yearning 
A pattern spread; and soon what yearning 
My days are counted: Fve had warning;
The wind, would enter, gently warning
Tatyana’s brilliant catch discerning,
Onegin, like Childe Harold, scorning
I must be certain in the morning
When the cool messenger of morning.
xHv An icy bath begins his morning.
This ever -rapturous hero, burning
The poet, with impatience burning.
Had her shy wistful heart been burning; 
A kindred soul, he held, was burning
XIII Instead of that, our friend was burning
How ardently this breast was burning! 
Will feel her heart with pity burning.
But, every interruption spurning,
Tug at the leather rein, and turning
And to the final pages turning.
XXll Her book in hand, and slowly turning
Iv But it is time I was returning
Xll And here the gossip is returning
Into one image, her heart leaping 
From the drawn bow the arrow leaping
XV Your fate is put into the keeping
xlv One thought I would that you were keeping
The hour for waking and for sleeping;
And Grandison, who leaves us sleeping.
"I cannot help it: I am weeping . . .
Tatyana, dear Tatyana! Weeping,
The orchestra’s already drooping;
And entered. Here the throng is trooping; 
Is heedless of the friendly clapping;
A rival, or to catch him napping.
The old gray nurse thinks she is napping
Where Thalia as she’s gently napping 
And enters softly without rapping,
None was so quick as he at trapping
And then, refreshed after a dipping,
With pipe alight you’d find me sipping
Until, near dawn, his head was dropping 
The poet did not think of stopping
This ditty sounds for Tanya’s ring:
Tatyana shows no sign of caring
”She’s mine!” cries Eugene, stern and daring;
The child of shrewdness and of daring,
Let no sly reader be so daring —
Such is the guerdon of your daring!
With drooping head and languid bearing
The day to come, what is it bearing?
Xlli Till they were out of sight and hearing . . .
That he, when wheels were within hearing,
But are those stirrups he is hearing?
XI She walks across a snowy clearing,
Might dash away as they were nearing.
She dreams. And wonders are appearing
Tatyana’s husband is appearing.
Her trinkets rudely from her tearing;
The ball’s wild gaiety was wearing.
Plucks at the ear-rings she is wearing,
The maids and coachmen vie in swearing; 
^AVell, how are the young ladies faring?
The merchant, to the port is faring 
Now through the open meadow faring,
The chilly dark the girl is sharing
Built by the fishermen was flaring.
Amid the snowdrifts, seething, roaring,
Screws up his eye and is preparing
And while the breakfast is preparing
But he refuses; he’s preparing
Onegin’s traits with mine comparing —
xlviii ”Pour me a little more, be sparing . . .
In vain into the darkness staring
Such as the Muse alone can bring;
To youthful hearts its tempests bring
As one who through a fog is peering,
To drown the jealous whispering.
Nor calls them, noons, for mustering;
Touched by the careless twittering,
To darkness’ kind abode repairing,
He offered her his arm. Despairing,
The mountain maid, untamed, inspiring,
To travel, you must be desiring 
Then, with a look that showed her tiring,
My legs betray me . . . But it’s tiring
And . . . could not. Now she spoke, inquiring
Now my companions are inquiring:
To rest the nags: the halts were boring. 
But Tanya’s mother, not ignoring
The chairs shoved backward scrape the flooring;
The tender leaves, but in the spring 
The bank; one hears a gentle spring;
As fields are blest by storms of spring:
His doubts were never past the curing,
And more play whist, whose fame’s enduring —
The mother fell to figuring
Green tables are set up, alluring
He found it puzzling but alluring;
The Nereids’ low murmuring.
Like bees that from the hive are pouring 
A torrent gray with foam is pouring;
Thither she came to sport and sing
The while we hear the woodland sing?
To him of whom indeed I sing . . •
While wildly aU the fiddles sing
She bade me hear the waters sing,
I was a dolt and could not sing.
Seeks omens in the song they sing;
Indoors, the maid will softly sing
It is a phantom you are chasing,
He often paid a call, surmising 
Such vulgar scenes as these despising.
Your scorn. You did not find surprising 
III For verse — it would not be surprising,
A welcome; it was not surprising 
Zaretzky, not at all disguising
Most harshly: there was no disguising
Her voiceless grief was past disguising;
And started on his aimless cruising.
She hears and does not hear the closing
The first clear picture is disclosing
They travel homeward quickly, choosing.
You are the helpmeet I’d be choosing:
ill My path was what the crowd was choosing;
But who does that is only choosing
XXXlll She used a sing-song voice; and, posing,
Time was when she would be composing
Each morning I awake proposing
An ordered way of life, confessing 
The day my father gave his blessing;
We won good old Derzhavin’s blessing
The fair ones, whom you were addressing 
Worthy of him I am addressing,
And the world smiled upon her, pressing
The marriage-broker kept on pressing
No more I find it quite so pressing
Affection’s pledge, indeed, expressing
And other cares, severe, distressing,
In those white hands would be distressing! 
Here was Onegin, then, possessing
This is no rhetoric I’m using:
And I, all discipline refusing,
And friendship’s claims he was refusing.
IV And reader, you are not refusing
Ceased, like all else, to be amusing.
Seduction ceased to be amusing,
The drum is heard, the city’s rousing,
A shelf of books he’s been perusing.
And what of my Onegin? Drowsing,
Oton is so accommodating.
For if they sing, they can’t be eating
Where the maids sang to keep from cheating
The father’s simple words repeating.
Forgive me, then, for thus retreating. 
All Eugene knew is past relating.
Gulnare’s bold singer emulating,
How many follies then were floating
In golden languor vaguely floating;
Once free, and night will find me gloating
I could not see it without gloating,
XXXll Was at that moment busy gloating
Their masters wearily berating.
Vlll And I am not exaggerating
And where indeed of her they’re prating.
He quits the rout, and, meditating.
XXI Thoughts sad and sweet still agitating
Talon’s Ms goal, no hesitating:
Onegin without hesitating
XXVI Upon the mill-stone dissertating
Unspoiled by the vain show and fleeting
After this imexpected meeting,
Could she but have foreseen the meeting 
Tatyana’s letter For days^ until another meeting.
Still half asleep, nature is meeting
xiv Next of the children’s breathless meeting.
The year’s bright dawn with gentle greeting.
Vll With equal warmth a comrade’s greeting
And answer with the barest greeting.
And the two friends for death competing, 
The fire is out; the ashes, shifting,
xlvii A thread of smoke is upward drifting;
A noisy brood. Not without fighting.
Not with a notion of delighting
Upon the dam leaned Lensky, waiting.
His friend [Kaverin] must be waiting.
Keeping his morning coffee waiting.
She should go home, where guests are waiting
The carriage horses, chilled with waiting.
Just for a dash of lemon waiting.
The messenger was not kept waiting:
The dogs attack her, all but biting
Breathes through the words she is inditing.
For friendship’s sake would I were writing
Propped on her elbow, she is writing. 
And yet win luster from my writing;
I have no faith in its requiting
Eugene was not alone in noting
xlv Amen: but Jfriendly be our parting.
The afternoon of life is starting,
His cup of tea with rum deserting,
Two days he found it quite diverting:
Because the tune is so diverting,
lit) The shady thickets’ cool, begirting
But, feeling the blind archer’s sting,
I drag myself about; timers hasting.
Yet in vain boredom I am wasting
Pray introduce me.” "You are jesting.”
Whom you have found so interesting?
He knows dehght when he’s adjusting
Or when through liveried throngs he’s thrusting
"I cannot grasp it. I’ll be betting
1 6 The load of oysters they were getting
Aside all timid thoughts, forgetting 
How sad it is to be forgetting!
We careless fellows leave the fretting
It is no wonder I am fretting . .
Into the silent study, setting
You have a Russian family setting,
They waltz, they bow, they curtsey, flitting
In her room w"hile the light is flitting;
Just now, did I not see you flitting
And rightly: for Onegin, sitting
With frowning brow he would be sitting 
Alw"ays together, now they’re sitting
Through the dim room where I am sitting.
liii While unobserved, Tatyana’s sitting
At the spinet, then swiftly quitting 
X Severe, and he was not acquitting
But it is late, he should be leaving;
The world of glory thus bereaving,
the story goes that Orestes and Pylades, having 
Affection^ s spark in you^ believing 
Friends, for the poet you are grieving,
He feels that it must break with grieving. 
We met by chance; /, though^ perceiving
The north wind breathes and bellows, driving
’Tis time: my pen wants rest from driving:
Whole families of neighbors driving
The guests are early in arriving.
And golden autumn is arriving.
With the ninth wave the ship’s arriving
to which of them should be the victim, each striving 
In tracking you! I should be moving 
Now stirred? Is it vexation moving 
Among the tents of nomads moving.
The polite ”yes” that is behooving.
Full soon my errant Muse was proving
My style and my affairs improving.
A pitch-sealed bottle they were serving 
I vurite you, and my act is serving
(Alas, too salty), and observing 
LETTER I know of whot I am deserving —
If friends and kin are undeserving.
But for my wretched fate preserving
XXI And firmly count upon preserving
He laughs, and they are all guffawing;
His slightest move is overawing;
She searches for a passage showing
A lily of the valley blowing
Or, lulled by Lethe’s quiet flowing,
And hotter yet the blush is glowing
The dream alarms her, and not knowing
While the dull husband, fully knowing 
And blissful still, since all unknowing,
Her worth, each year more sullen growing. 
Watched fondly, in seclusion growing,
But still she pants, her terror growing.
The friends, without delaying,
She does not argue: by delaying
We win the game that w^e are playing.
But nothing hurts when you are playing;
A fairy light about her playing,
Was jesting subtly and displaying 
Were greeted, with almost dismaying
Here one heard naught but echoes, dying,
The magic of the bow obeying,
The noise is queer and terrifying.
Now from the dish where they are lying
In the steep shade a camel lying;
And one may find a mirror lying
Beside his heavy mate is lying.
Upon the streets the snow is lying,
About the hills and meadows lying.
In the dark hours ere Morpheus, flying,
Thus far away her thoughts are flying;
From distant streets where cabs were flying, 
And one fibne morning finds him flying
In many guises she comes flying:
There a Circassian’s horse goes flying;
XXll The clock strikes ten: he’s off, he’s flying,
Our northern summer, swiftly flying,
The day is done: he’s not replying,
xl And even as we are denying
xH Before her, there was no denying,
V He hit an ace, there’s no denying,
With caution through the key -hole spying
liv When a great general, espying
Sometimes he reads to Olga, trying
He counts the slow hours, vainly trying
Tanya, her silken belt untying,
Have passages on nature vying 
Time was when all the world was vying
The gallants for their hostess vying.
Above the domes of Moscow, dazing 
The goal is there before them. Blazing
Onegin comes, apologizing.
By mental effort tranquilizing
xli The former Tanya, recognizing
If you but knew how agonizing
Her husband, in the corner, dozing,
I hardly read, I’m often dozing.
Our Czar was dozing . . .
A youth, who on the snow seems dozing;
At dusk a sleigh’s the thing, and caMng:
And curls as black as they were long.
Are far too pleasant to seem long.
I cannot say; I’ve talked so long
To dwell on sorry things so long.
To whom your pensive verse belong?”
To which, God help me, I belong.
That I am feeling far from strong; 
In this case it is not too strong
To call that friend of freedom wrong.
And I can’t say the clique is wrong 
My story out, and it is wrong 
Runs smoothly as a hackneyed song.
Rapt eloquence in speech and song.
Caressingly repaid your song?
Sing a song, a happy song.
Upon the oak her tufts are hung;
Above this modest urn there hung 
Her billowy soft rugs are flung;
We loved them, though, when we were young
Princess Aline, when she was young,
The eyes of the ingenuous young;
And when, besides, her heart was wrung:
Not for you our songs are sung.
Caressed the tomb o’er which it swung.
For him one moral had to teach;
Alone had eyes, and every speech 
And so was captured by the French —
Line 4. Bichat: an eighteenth-century French
Drunk as an owl, into a trench.
And wake the birds in beech and larch.
He did not value letters much.
Or in the shoulder feel a touch
And rightly, but his pain was such
Alone? What of the eye-glass, eh?
Calash^ kibitka, crowded sleigh.
Past the Neva in a swift sleigh;
A slender crescent riding high.
Next day before the sun was high.
And hand meets hand, and hearts beat high; 
Paid them the tribute of a sigh.
And, there at home, for Russia sigh.
But the sad ruin brought no sigh
I strolled into the farmyard — faugh!
My poor nurse sleeps beneath the bough . . .
O’ergrown. No wreath hangs on the bough; 
Betrays my stomach, and although 
May pass me by or pierce me through;
If not, my dear. I’ll see you through.”
Not thus have sought to cut a dash.
Past sentry-boxes now they dash,
Past shops and lamp-posts, serfs who lash
Eugene should not have been so rash.
Have been away! Before you vanish 
My conscience speaks — ^pray let me finish;
My love, first warm, would soon diminish, 
Lines 13-14. See the description of the Finnish
Or is it that we fail to cherish
But first, what dark delight you cherish, 
And you, my dear, are doomed to perish;
III Mourn those that autumn doomed to perish.
My restless thoughts, and I must perish. 
Egyptian pirate, but he was more probably a Moorish 
Behold each generation flourish,
And watch life’s furrows briefly nourish
No gift but weariness and anguish 
Is it that I was born to languish.
And leave the forests gaunt and harsh.
And turn the meadow to a marsh 
Deep drifted in the snowy hush.
And not without a tell-tale blush.
in the first edition. It is possible, however, that Push- 
He passes over in a rush
little brush.”
And watch the failing of his breath,
And bids us cast away the wreath 
Across in safety to the path;
But naught avails her girlish wrath;
And throws this challenge in our teeth:
And puts her little hand at length 
My dear, when old age comes at length
Let alone grief ... I have no strength . . .
and as an eccentric beauty, A. F. Zakrevskaya, with 
Onegin sits and drinks a health,
And glances at the door by stealth.
like his close friend, Pushkin, was addicted to both 
Away with Olga, nothing loth;
And some harsh judges found, forsooth,
French dishes for the gourmet’s tooth.
A very pedant in the youth.
Of him had filled his simple youth,
Or love, the grave concern of youth?
And is the vernal crown of youth 
And truffles, luxury of youth,
My frivolous and merry youth!
I must admit the sorry truth,
PETRARCH
To horse’s stamp and human speech!
They bark and whistle, sing and screech. 
Page 163. Oton: Cesar Oton kept an inn at which
That day would soon be on the march.
They stop because the servants fetch 
They’ve played eight rubbers at a stretch.
Why don’t I travel with a crutch.
They hitch them to the master’s sleigh; 
That I should meet you. God on High 
Their mark the temple or the thigh.
She too at length came forth, and nigh 
They’d sup, then time for sleep drew nigh.
The letter shakes; she heaves a sigh;
The room, though not without a sigh.
To tempt with tender word and sigh
The guests’ sly glances were enough.
The window, where he read it through.
The matter for a fortnight; oh.
Say who it is that now the Spanish 
With none to understand or cherish
Who taught her how to be so lavish
With ardent words, and how to ravish 
’^"There Mithridates sought his end”: when Push-
The rapids and the underbrush
Upon his brow the mark of death,
The maiden lies there, pale as death.
Tatyana, and with failing breath.
The frightened maiden gathers strength
plicitly to the verse of Bogdanovich, an eighteenth- 
Stanza XXX F, Line 3. Chamfort: an eighteenth-
Presents the charming sisters both 
Was pleasure happiness in sooth
Was with Tatyana — ^not, forsooth,
The poet, and he may, forsooth,
The man? Or vanity, forsooth?
Then, in the flower of his youth?
XXxix To lose his ardor with his youth.
The mighty Peter in his youth;
To his assassins without ruth.
Quite withered now in very truth?
Bakhchi-Sarai.”
cxviii
Chamfort and Herder and Manzoni,
From shipboard, thunder dawn, than I, 
Chapter I
Chapter I.
Chapter II
Chapter III
Chapter VIII
Chapter VII
Chapter VI
he may have wished thus to tease the reader’s imagi- 
I want my peace, my pot of stchi.
Her anguished heart some peace w as granteti
LA SOTTO WORM NUBIiOSI E BREVI
Pushkin’s poem, "The Fountain of Bakhchi-Sarai.”
Should howl absurdly: ^It is I!”
txxviii
Stanza XXI, Line 14- An instance of chilled senti-
We have so many neighbors, I
xxviii
xxviii
xxviii
xxviii
xxviii
:xxviii
[xiii
xxxiii
xxxvii
xxxvii
xxxvii
xxxvii
xxxii
with a seaman, referred to in the original as Morali 
xli]
words of a refrain in a duettino by Vincenzo Gabussi; 
xxxvi
xxxvi
xxxi
xxxi
xxxi
xxxi
et plus on est sur de VavoirJ*^
And Tanya found the journey bleak.
So be it; but I had to speak;
Today it is my turn to speak.
And none can hear his neighbor speak.
In passing that my stanzas speak 
The golden tongue Italians speak;
Or less, that I should hear you speak.
Upon the dull mind’s slumbers break.
They chortle, argue, shout and squeak.
He pens, with trembling hand and weak,
of Pushkin’s, translated French tragedies, while Shak- 
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
And drunken stamp of the trepak,
Means labor fit to break the back . . .
Liqueurs, a ledger, applejack,
What is it? Water! And this lack 
And at the tavern-door the clack
He rescued them, and with the knack
While our sad rhymesters earn a kick?"
One hears the clicking of a cock.
And Lucifer’s hailed by the cock;
Was sleeping, heedless of the clock;
The hammers on the ramrods knock;
This pool we bathe in, friends, this muck 
In which, God help us, we are stuck.
Or touch to flame a rosy cheek,
You lectured me, I listened, meek;
And far too wretched to be meek
And I have learned how to be meek*
Is just as deaf and just as meek.
Armenian, Spaniard, Frenchman, Greek,
Or with such urgent ardor seek
That I should see you once a week 
They had to travel for a week.
And gorges seven days a week.
Ilya, the cautious, prone to balk.
The family would meet and talk,
N'est-ce pas, for all we want of talk? 
I can’t go out: I cannot walk —
Oh, empty world! Oh, stupid folk
She knows her role! With none to thank — 
Obtaining, with himself to thank.
First glory, and then wealth and rank.
Deferring to my wealth and rank.
Bears the proud burden of her rank!
And served each course to them by rank.
Liked hearty guests who ate and drank,
Have given me prestige? Be frank!
And nowhere is a spot of ink.
And the long evenings black as ink.
They chew. The pleasant prandial chink
A down-stuffed couch are all, I think.
At bottom, and, too bored to think.
But for that sermon do not think
Here’s Pradt and Scott. You do not think
The touching glasses chime and clink.
The snows still gleaming softly pink,
Have been content to eat and drink,
You care to? Check accounts, or drink,
Forgotten bridges rot and sink;
Your look that made my spirit sink!
Refuse to let you sleep a wink;
Or (since it’s ugly to be drunk)
An insect in a flower sunk;
Into a more exacting book.
Here, mornings, he would read his book . . . 
A glance at many a curious book.
Till Lensky, too absorbed to look,
The old man had no time to look
The meadows’ solitary look,
This too was the old master’s nook;
With his own pawn takes his own rook.
The purling of a gentle brook;
In catching Tanya’s eye, she took 
That we are driving in the dark.
You’re bored.” ”As ever. But I mark
The czar caroused with zest, but mark!
Long years, maybe, a sudden spark . . .
Zaretzky was not one to shirk —
At once he offered with a smirk
And slowly by a secret network
The classic trumpet, sword, and mask; 
You’ll bid us free, to speed our task,
9|« ^ 9l<
And prompts something satirical;
He looked more crestfallen than regal
But they demand a madrigal!
enlightened Europe, nails are cleaned with a special 
How dismal!
In Russian? And the task’s infernal. 
Beshtau, the sharp-peaked, the eternal
He read miscellany and journal.
Fair ladies who are sentimental —
And so they aged, like all things mortal,
Is Eugene! By another portal 
But bears refreshment and renewal —
Dear reader, pardon the betrayal;
from the early editions; the Russian Beau Brummel; 
And sentinel to sentinel 
Each hour of torment added fuel
For thus he brings his passion’s fuel
Like Petrarch, he finds love less cruel. 
And in the crowd that filled the hovel,
Always the same and always novel.
For the first time in any novel
Let critics carp, he will not grovel:
I fear, friends, lest your patience fail:
Do not be cross because I fail
Away already: without fail.
Hard pavements, like a coat of mail.
As did this author: chief of all 
His toast rings out the first of all,
And once I gave my meager all
Come here, my dear. Why, this seems all
But Tanya had no tears at all;
Asleep j&rom boredom?” "Not at all.”
I understood them not at all.
A dream . . . Cousine^ do you recall 
And seemed about to faint and fall;
Great ladies, far too proud to fall,
And what the fashions were that fall.
How is it that you do not fall 
Is bound up with the servants’ hall.
Its pleasures, like the city’s, pall.
Are all your relatives quite w ell?
For marriage bond or marriage bell;
. . . cell joined to cell . . .
And sees the gaping fiends of hell:
As that of one beneath a spell.
As custom bade; with charm and spell 
And found it rather hard to spell;
And now, since I’ve no more to tell,
And in exchange he took as well
Among the huts where Tartars dwell . . . 
I take my leave of you — farewell.
I’ve a suspicion, make me ill.
Beside a stream, or on a hill.
But other fancies, dark and chill.
And lightly clad, though airs were chill,
Her passion, not by chance or skill; 
He’s in, and flying to the mill.
At dawn tomorrow, near the mill;
He lays her down upon the sill.
If you recall your Tanya still,
If only you were with me still,
Eugene was apt at keeping still;
He frowns, and everyone is still;
Let him believe in wonders still
Her growing doubts they cannot still.
And doing with her as he will.
But now her reason and her will 
His doubts: for meet they surely will 
In mind: that if I had my will,
He drinks: with greedy howls they swill;
Let the sonorous stanzas roll;
Is he bewitched? It’s very droll.
Before her charge, whose eyes were full.
A spider; here a red-capped skull 
Another neighbor tapped his skull:
He found the fairest faces null;
For woman is a tender fool,
For learning takes an utter fool.
But heedlessly; she cannot school
And love is but the devil’s tool.
In kerchief and long gown of wool.
Baroness Barbara von Kriidener; St. Preux and Wol- 
And he had set her heart awhirl!
As men need air, they found kvass needful,
"I see no harm in that; I’m grateful.”
A Kantian, unspoiled and truthful,
Ancestral Eve, you find delightful 
By what is his cold torpid soul
Could alter Lensky’s virgin soul 
For God knows whom inspired your soul, 
I thank you from my inmost soul . . .
A scholar in a yellow shawl!
Eavesdroppers, be off, auxiyl
MAKES HASTE TO LIVE AND CANNOT WAIT TO FEEL.
Of syllables so musical 
Poor Lensky! Past the grave’s grim portal.
Say, now, my friend, what will you feel
My mother coaxed and wept; the sequel
Or are our thoughts in truth so cruel
Perhaps what kept him was the mail,”
Spring calls you to the verdant soil.
She hates their having come at all.
No card-game, poetry, or ball.
Or Fashion Journal, could enthrall
Possessed me, underneath your spell, 
Or the old uncle’s, I shall tell
Onegin, and I loved you; well? 
She did not speak the language well
Sounding the cry that all was well;
She hears the raucous laughter swell 
She fears the dream bodes only ill.
Save for the chorus on the hill
Some charming spot to hold her still.
She conned the talk against her will;
She did the overseeing; cool
Or wait for her hot cheeks to cool.
Second: the poet was a fool.
One who has lived and thought, grows scornful.
Most fearful and most wonderful!
Seduce you, though the cost be frightful. 
So Heaven wills it. Your young soul 
STILL FOR EVER FARE THEE WELL.
Stanza XX, Line 8, Istomina: a celebrated bal-
the sizes of our waists and found them to be identical. 
Whose hearts the years at length anneal; 
When he lies deaf to your appeal?
Then he presents the madrigal.
That my performance is infernal,
3 The background, and Mashuk, the vernal.
Tatyana read no Russian journal.
Where love burned like a living coal.
Where I would loll, without a goal, 
There the impassive general
Stanza X/F, Line 13. Shishkov: a vice-admiral
The joys they knew have all proved mortal.
Tatyana leaps like nothing mortal 
XI That Olga’s love, alas, was mortal.
Submissive through the grave’s dark portal. 
The aged, at the grave’s grim portal.
You know; besides, all lots were equal 
That natiure’s season of renewal 
There was a time when the portrayal
Than other men are doomed to feel:
Volume the third of Marmontel,
XIII The base coquette before the duel;
Tatyana’s solitude adds fuel
XIV Her heart speaks ever of the cruel
The rain of passion is not cruel.
Though it suggests a peasant’s hovel,
The very hero of our novel!
To come today, and without fail.
Tatyana scanned them without fail.
To reading, where a finger-nail 
XXXVll I shall, to pleasure you, detail.
To sunny gardens’ fragrant toil;
The ball-room summons one and all.
Tatyana had no doll at all
The colonel’s sending it. A ball!
Where guests disperse, or at a ball!
Thus brilliantly begins the ball.
The fatal hour is past recall;
To get it, friends, do you recall?
The poet lets his pistol fall.
Upon each other’s necks they fall.
The bee deserts her waxen cell
To gather tribute from the dell.
Your heart responded how? Pray, tell!
To have your humble servant tell
The maids would gleefully foretell 
Where lindens hide the lovers well;
To know Onegin really well.
When all went out to say farewell,
Wili cure the lad, for good or ill.
The poor thing nearly swoons; she’s ill.
To gossip; but her heart would fill 
Walked to the stream below the hill; 
The grove’s asleep. The wind blows chill.
Your magic music and your skill:
The shadows creep across the sill.
They come. Quite unaffected still.
Their rapid bubbles hissing still;
The country round about was still,
Tatyana, spell-bound, lingers still.
To soil the sheets with flying quill;
That huckleberry syrup will,
The senses soon grew blunt and dull.
Who thought our Eugene was a gull;
Will love again. But self-control,
The folly of a simple girl:
Would dare to seek that gentle girl?
The vision of a peerless girl,
TO ONEGIN Dispel my doubts! My mind^s awhirl;
Steep cliffs above the ocean’s purl,
They too were of their duties heedful,
xliii She finds the city cold and hateful.
"Your fashionable world is hateful;
Tatyana cannot but be grateful
Vladimir Lensky, handsome, youthful,
xlvi One who has felt, is often mournful.
With joy the contemplative soul!
A serving-lad hands round the cream.
A horn rang out, as in a dream;
Bared silently, as in a dream.
At first Eugene began to dream
A drop of the dark fragrant stream;
And pleasant though it is to roam.
Anisya surely won’t ignore them;
''As in the old days poets wrote them —
Ah, little feet, how I did love them!
adding several stanzas to them.
But seeing Olga wouldn’t read ’em.
Another day without an aim;
By nothing stirred, where all is dim.
But though Onegin’s peace forsake him
But scarce did consciousness forsake him
Consumption yet may overtake him.
Because, between the lines before him. 
Again her pale face looms before him,
Dared clean his nails in front of him —
But tiresome ghosts. Can we unmask him? 
And so the bumptious guild denies him;
But no! — straight down the steps to meet him
And turned a joyful face to greet him
A novelty framed to divert him;
But when he comes they notify him
And at the window, not too grim.
And sulked, and swore that he would trim
Could not conceive how pompous Grimm
Admiring glory, loving freedom,
Been married long?” ^’Two years.” whom?”
Cut off before his hopes could bloom;
Ancestral portraits in the gloom
And freighted with a youthful gloom 
And damask of the drawing-room —
All crowd into the drawing-room 
eries and pranks,” together with some excerpts from 
And when they entered, arm in arm,
But dinner’s served, and arm in arm
Allows a zest to oinr alarm.
FROM
The sex, of course, is light as do’^m.
The first shy rays begin to gleam;
Is all abubble and agleam,
What verse, what talk, how fair a dream!
That little girl ... is it a dream?
has a terrifying dream.
Simplicity to her young dream?
Was reverie; she wreathed with dream 
The lonely thicket where a stream
Pale valley and the silver stream;
Upon the magic of that stream —
His oars above the drowsy stream;
Her tender fingers sewed no seam,
The horses scent the dead, and foam
You woodlands where I used to roam,
To tag each other, or to roam 
That little girl he did not deem
Is it because she cannot deem
The sad Yakushkin, it would seem,
Vll And later privately defame them
Or into concord gently shame them.
"What! only solemn odes? Just quote them:
When will you lose remembrance of them?
He sighed, no longer subject to them:
Yes, now the door is opened for them,
Most blessed is he who never knew them.
Stanza III, Lines 5-7. See ”First Snow,” a poem
heroine of Pushkin’s first narrative poem.
^'Why did you leave,” the maiden asked him,
XIV Deeply disturbed as thus she tasked him.
Theocritus and Homer bored him ;
If true delight you would afford him
Not hesitating to awake him.
No, soon the world began to bore him.
The page he read could scarcely bore him.
Her melancholy eyes adore him —
His friend for thus misleading him;
Why is he here? Who is he? Task him!
Is this world shut for aye to him?
Onegin (I return to him).
wards to St. Petersburg, offering a ransom for him, 
In vain the belles might clamor for him.
He yawns, for serious labor tries him.
She does not heed: and sore it grieves him
With perfect fireedom she receives him;
His mother stands and threatens him.
Had chased him and had quickly caught him.
Now in his study he bethought him
He thought: I must not disconcert him
He knew the task would sorely try him
Having, to satisfy a whim.
’Tis here, to please a lavish whim,
Stanza XXXII. The reference is to Wilhelm
lines from Rousseau’s Confessions, he wrote: ^’Grimm 
The company commander, whom 
Her soul was waiting . . . ah, for whom?
Prefigures joy to come, or doom;
Into a meadow sweet with bloom.
The idol of all maids in bloom.
Nor cards, nor gossip, chased his gloom; 
He’d stroll into the drawing-room 
vich Annibal, at the age of eight was kidnapped from 
the throne, showered him with favors. He retired from 
Stanza XXX F, Line 8. A simile borrowed from
phrasing a remark he made in a letter written from
Or in the morning, arm in arm.
The company could see no harm
In praise of so much wit and charm.
The tw"o explore the garden’s charm.
Her terror held a secret charm:
What more is asked? The world is warm
The couples to the table swarm;
Stanza F, Line 9. A mason: freemason; the term
In saturnine romanticism.
Has clothed a hopeless egoism 
Affected a most nasal '^'n”;
As though there were a tacit ban
Be ruled by what is small and mean?
And does his somber aspect mean 
Because there are no words in Russian
Bewildering the wretched man.
A glum, and next a merry man;
"A story?” asked the good old woman,
A thought was born, and grew, unbidden;
Behind a hill the moon is hidden;
But though the arguments are keen,
A giddy fop, and cruel spleen
And chequered brown and gold and green, 
Away, his profile may be seen ...”
Alone along the sea-shore; then
But years went rolling by, and then
An album verse with tender mien;
By dreams of a far country shaken.
But now, ’tis as a house forsaken.
A loaf is proffered, coins are taken,
But our Onegin’s heart was stricken
And know that heart will never quicken?
And w^ho could wield the poet’s pen. 
And on Caucasian cliffs how often.
At least, if pity seemed to soften
Alas, our poor Onegin’s smitten:
As hermits live who hope for heaven
Another ! . . . No, I could have given
But she had heard of them a dozen
A soldier spouse and a campaign.
After they’ve quarreled once again;
And as he says farewell again 
And promised them each year again
And that it cheated us again;
A thing the winter could not chain;
Alas! by a friend’s hand was slain.
And the cool yawns that come amain. 
Behind the strange bed’s silken curtain
A creature arid, cold, and vain.
An uhlan wooed her, not in vain;
And you, skilled pupils of Levshin,
as against a fence. — Pushkin.
At everything she gazes on;
a rather plump young girl with whom Pushkin con- 
And nothing to remark or pardon;
A trespasser may hope for pardon.
But first he answers: ’’Agafon.”
And doings, in a friendly fashion?
And then the wayward course of passion. 
A missive eloquent of passion.
But now, the prey of evil passion,
And all that Paris in her passion
But what availed her urgent passion?
All this was but the bored profession
And at the following sweet session
A pure love’s innocent effusion;
And thus reduce him to confusion;
And halts in sudden deep confusion;
As he comes near; it’s no illusion:
But I salute hope’s shy intrusion,
Because he hated litigation
And tears of reconciliation
And presses her soft hand — elation
But nothing offers consolation.
Alone, and sunk in calculation,
But it was not capitulation
18 Behind the scenes, the assignation?
And so her quick imagination
But Eugene’s sole preoccupation
And not long years of separation,
But she prepared a conflagration.
And you, oh, youthful inspiration,
Because my husband’s decoration,
As perfect as an illustration —
But reasonable conversation.
All this lends charm to conversation.
And without foolish affectation.
A spirit brooking no dictation?
Another, at a god’s dictation.
But with a new interpretation,
Absorbed in bitter meditation
And now, at spring’s bright invitation.
And dreaming of his exultation
But this bright sibilant potation
And clinch the point with a quotation.
Allured by neither looks nor station.
And many a solemn protestation 
And found their prudent talk vexation;
Anticipating this distraction.
But yielding to a dream’s distraction,
And holding him in such affection
But I foresee a fresh objection.
And on the last page this reflection:
And your remarkable collection
And always needing some correction,
And yet she found it no affliction —
Beloved ... or such was his conviction,
About her early indiscretion . . .
As though she feared an inquisition
A note of Lensky’s composition;
As many wiles as I could mention 
A wanton sigh was not worth mention:
But in parenthesis I mention:
And by the way, now that I mention
At home his pistols claimed attention;
Although indeed I paid attention.
At times she pays him no attention;
And does not pay the least attention.
Another’s amorous invention
And out of an old-fashioned notion
And drink desire’s sweet poisoned potion.
Amusement while you mix his potion;
And when we find our old devotion 
”Ah, nurse, your mind is not in question.
And yet, were morals not in question,
But to endure I need one boon —
And craved the forest’s shady boon.
A night of magic, and a moon . . .
As infant slumbers, as the moon
And walk him in the afternoon.
Alone, Tatyana broods, and soon
By a most happy whim. Lord Byron
But at the late and sterile season,
And visit at the Christmas season,
Ah, spring, fair spring, the lovers’ season,
And did his shade in sorrow yearn?
A Kalmuck, spectacled and worn,
And everywhere that you may turn
And heedless of the winter fun.
And send them, armed, from Led at dawn,
And sometimes in my heart I own
And wore — her last defences down —
Before the altar, head cast down.
A mob-cap and a dressing-gown.
And not a station will be known
Already, ’neath the bridal crown.
And people later, with a frown,
Absorbed the girl, and she was thrown 
And the opinion of the town . . .
And worn in comfort, far from town.
BYRON
(Moor Ali). It was rumored that he had been an 
Like this decrepit publican?
ing; he also remembered his favorite sister. Lagan, 
Like this since first the world began;
Ethiopian.
Of the wild geese, a noisy clan;
man.”
On writing of another man.
”Of maids and creatures superhuman?
Of whom ’twas said throughout his span:
Now southward swept the caravan
”Here you will find the master’s den.
From other fires that had been hidden
Homeward, along the kitchen-garden;
Of days long past, when he had been
Her manner was what it had been
imagination. K. used to relate that having once been 
nation. Some of the stanzas seem not to have been 
Can you, so generous, so keen.
Ivan Petrovich ne’er was keen,
Offended vanity or spleen?
Foot it neatly on the green!
Have dimmed the golden coal; half-seen,
Consequently, either I have the girth of a fifteen- 
I too had dropped, and found him then — 
I loved your image even then;
I’ll bring them to the altar then . . .
I trembled at your glance, and when
Her sweet simplicity of mien! . . .
My heart will as of old be shaken.
How noble was the tone he’d taken;
I wait: when once your look has spoken.
Malvine — because the set was broken 
hovskoy was a prolific author of comedies; both men 
Onegin fires . . . oh, hapless men.
May Heaven blast your page, amen!
E sempre bene, gentlemen.
He dined here. What fine gentlemen!
Framed somberly by gentlemen.
He’d take his fascinating pen 
Neva, oh, offspring of my pen.
He held that some by Fate were chosen
Of quiet summer nights, how often,
I heard her friendly accents soften;
He knew the ruses that would brighten
His heart is by such anguish bitten
It was decreed ... the will of Heaven
Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
He lived — in summer rose at seven;
He took, and fain would be forgiven;
He gazes, and his heart is riven:
edition, prepared for the press by the author in 1833; 
Eh, friend?” But no, attend again:
Flames up, the embers glow again 
Darkly it rushes on amain,
Careless of others’ joy and pain.
Feeling and thought with music’s strain.
by Prince Vyazemsky. — Pushkin.
Cottin.
From then on he never left the Emperor’s side. In 
have said that Chaadayev should be exhibited in 
Line 8. There was an exceptionally fine vintage in
Is dressed, undressed, and dressed again?
He yawns and starts to snore again.
I’d live through every ball again.
New warmth has melted winter’s chain; 
Her dear familiar room shows plain,
His heart is all but crushed with pain,
One thought must fill your heart with pain:
He does not even guess my pain.
On sentiment we draw the curtain;
How much of life I spent in vain.
never wrote fortune-books himself. — Pushkin.
Fine tales about your fair young Finn.
On her loose hair, her tears, and on 
’’He never puts a civil face on.
He writes a verse for her to dote on —
Enough, sing other tunes, move on!” 
In youth, were such the joys I’d count on?
Napoleon.
In such a brief and tragic fashion —
I would prefer your harsh cold fashion
Is the shrewd elegance of fashion,
Oh, yes. But there’s the whirl of fashion.
Lies in your hands, for you to fashion;
No smart conceits does Lensky fashion
One day when leading his battalion.
He fell from off a Kalmuck stallion.
Ere yet the crystal with precision
Have passed since in a hazy vision 
I love fierce youth, my private passion
Of speech to this insulting passion.
I throw myself on your compassion . . .
Onegin heard the sweet confession
He would implore the shy confession.
He barely spoke; his urgent mission
I cannot suffer the discussion —
One takes a risk in such discussion,
In deep reflection, hot discussion.
In worldly dazzle and confusion
Here’s bronze and china in profusion.
Fate plans a different conclusion . . .
His heart the nest of fond illusion,
I am deceived by no illusion;
From early youth his dedication
I fear lest in my supplication
I listened, not without elation.
Could show him an approximation 
He’s killed! The fearful affirmation
IX The stir of noble indignation,
Let critics wreak their indignation
He waits with jealous indignation
Oh, land of boundless fascination!
Is it the music’s fascination
IX Discovers a new fascination
Come, rouse anew imagination —
Expressing the discrimination,
He quits his place of hibernation —
Makes Eugene quake with consternation.
Now soothed by this anticipation.
His object was emancipation.
Fie finds suflScient occupation
Ivii I too made it my occupation
Of jealous pangs, and separation,
How often, sick with separation,
Increase the din of celebration;
Described with frenzied inspiration
He knew one constant inspiration.
Here you will find as decoration
Now with what eager concentration
During a drunken conversation
He fled their noisy conversation
He had some other expectation?
He early knew the agitation
He dropped his eyes in irritation
Onegin’s letter A trick worthy of detestation;
Enough to kill a reputation.
Not all Onegin’s observation
He never thought of the vexation 
His jealousy and his vexation
IX Herein demanded satisfaction.
I reminisced of the attraction
Could Russia pardon my defection
No rival in the girl’s affection . , .
On whom shall we bestow affection,
On the first page there’s this confection:
Nor shown a fighter’s predilection.
’’Correct; you’ll bring for our inspection 
Of what, in fashionable diction
li Is he who can believe a fiction.
code, is told in the Introduction.
Old fogies all, chained to tradition,
He soon consigns them to perdition. 
Must breathe no word, must never mention
Except the stomach; I may mention 
My meaning? Nothing. Aly intention
Of corks, with much the same attention 
Now having given due attention
Nothing attracted his attention.
Lays claim to the young girl’s attention; 
Each smile of yours, each glance, each motion;
In every nook, with strange emotion;
He’d catch the moment of emotion.
No more a reason for emotion,
Iviii To whom did your confessed devotion.
Low cunning must assist devotion
I know there’ll be a warm reception
Obeying folly’s least suggestion,
Is the benign and silent moon;
Of seeing you by afternoon . . . .
In torment at your feet to swoon —
One thing alone to think upon 
Lest they should miss us beyond reason
My soul with dreams that challenge reason. 
IV And melancholy minus reason.
IV She loved the Russian winter season
’’Onegin is a boor, a mason;
My Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
Of Lovelace or of Grandison,
However, was no Grandison.
No more my Eugene could discern . . .
Flings wide the door; his caftan’s torn,
For all through Russia there will run 
lines run:
Now from the shed at crack of dawn
On past the bright parterre, the lawn.
Olenka too began to yawn,
Had made the choice, ’twas not her own;
Of any nonsense I set down,
Horns and a quilted dressing-gown;
I would not leave the world, unknown.
Headlong into a world unknown.
Is in these parlous days unknown;
ONEGIN TRAVELS TO ASTRAKHAN,
Stanza XXX. The reference is to Baratynsky, an
Stanza XXX, Line 6. Tolstoy: F. P. Tolstoy, an
Semyon Petrovich is as mean.
On stilts the bold pedestrian
They say the ladies should read Russian,
They met; except that both were human.
Page 161. Tumansky: Vasily Ivanovich Tuman-
The words again with stifled moan.
To kiss the breast with languor laden;
Poor Lensky! Olga’s heart was laden
The mansion, hy a hill well hidden,
Thus grows a seed the earth has hidden 
To brush the shy lips of a maiden 
Stanza XF/, Line 10. Nina Voronskaya has been
The sight of them produces spleen.
Shouts bravo in his sleep, and then
She went. Onegin stood forsaken,
Or it may be that we are taken
The phrasing, awkward or mistaken,
The cheerful morning sounds awaken;
Three-fifty was the price bespoken,
The painful dream forever broken!
The most congenial of men.
They were unlike as any two men:
Stanza VIII, Lines 9-14. The first song is an omen
Sings of the Volga fishermen;
Than with a quite impartial pen 
Or graced by Baratynsky’s pen,
The passions, though, concerned more often
Such stuff as Lafontaine has written . . .
The moon, the lampion of heaven.
She cannot. No? But why? She’s given
service with the rank of General-in-Chief, and died in 
Stanza X///, Line 13. Chatzky: a character in
The darkened mind is clear again; 
She breathes again and yet again,
That Hymen brings, the grief and pain, 
Soon found a way to soothe her pain;
The land that knew my love, my pain, 
Reply, Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain!
She lies for hours, with sleep uncertain;
Stanza X, Lines 1~2. The reference is to Onegin
Stanza XXIV, Line 11. To this passage Pushkin
— Pushkin.
— Pushkin.
smith. — Pushkin.
rateur. — Pushkin.
on rural economy. — Pushkin.
skipper. "He is a man after my own heart,” Pushkin 
— ^Pushkin.
Or more times JBrom her Moscow cousin, 
Romancer, having settled on 
Pushkin in St. Petersburg in 1829, and commented on 
The grove, the bridge, the lake, and on.
She runs, he follows on and on;
Or on the sheet another wrote on,
She thinks, uncertain, and goes on.
received, for a poem of his own composition, the con- 
Pyotr Vyazemsky, a minor author and brilliant con- 
The Academic lexicon.
The pattern of a paragon.
She followed, as he did, the fashion;
To tempt the sporting man of fashion.
Reviews the past in wistful fashion:
specious pretext. Wearied by the lack of companion- 
The science of the tender passion
That trembles with another’s passion; 
Pores o’er a letter, in seclusion;
Perhaps this is a mad delusion^
The hall is packed to suffocation,
Since but a random education
The mansion j&rom its firm foundation
Shall greet you. Go, my dear creation:
Recall Dmitriyev’s castigation;
The poet’s earliest elation
She had not read with fascination
Tatyana stares in fascination,
Or else my demon — condemnation
She has no aim, no occupation.
There one can make a declaration,
The lady’s lasting admiration
The poet in his exaltation
4 Onegin’s wistful observation
Poets, it is my observation,
Or in a fit of blind vexation
Tatyana listened with vexation
Tanya’s the center of attraction.
Thus you, Yazykov, when affection
Quote Virgil, not a long selection.
The frozen funds of intellection —
Though it is true your recollection 
She was no beauty: that were fiction
Stood like a threatening apparition;
Since Latin’s held not worth attention,
They whisper: ^’Dimya, pay attention!”
The British Muse’s wild invention
The samovar, that blest invention,
Or bows to him — a cold convention;
She stands, suffused with shy emotion.
She loves an uhlan with devotion . . .
Or else a smile that’s pure deception,
Recall with pain the vanished boon:
The silent stars, the brooding moon —
The hero we’re intent upon.
Slow eyes come last to rest upon 
She loves the secrets that environ 
Stanza XLIX, Line 6. The reference is to Byron.
Tanya, though she could give no reason,
The novelist had long since won;
To learn my Eugene’s air of scorn.
The gentry all cried out in scorn,
Stanza XXF, Line 13. Lepage: a famous gun-
The name-day feast is soon begun.
The hero’s named, the work’s begun;
She does not sniff the cold, or run
The rosy dawn brings forth the sun,
Shines the resplendent southern sun —
Than is the moon one sees at dawn;
She trembles like a hunted fawn;
The lighted stage, and with a yawn 
She seemed a stranger to her own.
Ordains it so: I am your own.
To be united to his own,
Such shoulders I have never known!
Stifled, in solitude, unknown.
They vanish, claimed by the unknown;
Should see how lovely she has grown!
TO ONEGIN
Wades through the streets, if he but can;
'^Who? That fat general, you mean?”
XVI Of foreign history and Russian,
Why not, like that poor Tula man.
X. is an admirable man.
Who, in this cool majestic woman.
The ballroom’s ruler, scarcely human.
Unhesitatingly she ran.
Then Russia did as she was bidden.
Where winds and tempests were forbidden,
The dale is dark and vapor-ridden.
Vlll Alas! a young and lively maiden
XVI I might just see the house and garden,”
Your pleasures with a taste more keen,
The few who relish toil and teen).
tion at the Lyceum when Pushkin, as a boy of sixteen, 
Whose soul was shaped in Gottingen, 
Vladimir shuts the book, and then
Upon the finished product then;
To take aim also — ^but just then 
The ladies, each a picture when
You spoke, my very soul was shaken.
xlviii By what a storm his heart was shaken:
Whereby the mind or heart is shaken.
The spot itself was God-forsaken.
You came in dreams: I feared to waken,
With chalk. No knock can ever waken 
The hours go by: they do not waken;
When on the ground you see him, stricken. 
XI Its girlish fire began to quicken
What are her reveries unspoken?
The silence at long last is broken
’’Write odes, odes only, gentlemen,
Though once they praised my magic pen:
There pours in torrents from his pen 
Would grow more ardent very often,
xlvii O’er the Neva the sky woidd soften
XVll Onegin’s mocking voice would soften
XI He could pretend despair, to frighten.
While we, with married life not smitten. 
Would drop so tenderly at even . . .
xlv What does he hear? She dared . . . He’s driven
"Zarema”: the Khan’s jealous wife, who figures in
The fields with droplets once again), 
Where long my buried heart has lain.
With sudden passion, sudden pain . . .
We’re all Napoleons, we’re certain —
To mourn his absence, and in vain.
That youth was given us in vain,
The very plains where Wittgenstein
writing of Eugene Onegin.
the age of Catherine (he died in 1800). — Pushkin.
tivated Mme. de Sta9. — Pushkin.
winter in Baratynsky’s ”Eda.” — Pushkin.
With you, nor yet with you who spin 
With all a dandy’s mind can limn.
’’Your name is — what?” He passes on.
That write he must, and in this fashion — 
viii Of holding forth with great persuasion
Who would not weary of evasion.
Their gestmes marked by firm decision,
Thirty -two paces with precision;
XXXI His lyrics breathe a candid passion.
Yes, and the fear of the impression
To make a lasting deep impression.
Wearing a look of self-possession,
To love all ages owe submission;
Where is compassion, where confusion?
Your candor filled me with confusion;
Xxiv And, for the senses’ sweet confusion,
With hope, then prove it an illusion,
X She is the novelist’s creation:
When I knew ardor and elation.
The prince’s comrade and relation 
X Refused — he soon found consolation;
Were banished by her animation,
The world’s oblivious animation.
xvill Sped shafts of satire at the nation,
The lame Turgenev for his nation
You in my fond imagination . . .
Vlll A shape wherein imagination
With fiery imagination.
Was to a single occupation;
”1?” ”Yes, a birthday celebration —
Why should you have such veneration
Where is the noble aspiration.
The truest source of inspiration:
XXll She was his lyre’s first inspiration,
The poor shy girl whose adoration
That she should offer a narration 
Then they demand in compensation
The parlor hums with conversation,
xlvi I love it still, at the dictation
Where is the burning agitation.
What is he? A mere imitation,
Your friendship.” At this invitation 
xlix You have her mother’s invitation
vil With a strange, secret exultation;
While in the doorway took his station —
V With us, to miss a reputation
That I had stained my reputation — 
xlviii She thinks, hut it is sheer vexation
The poet, swift in thought and action,
XXli In whom discover no defection?
Why not? You can have no objection.
Two Petriads, and a collection
Vll Since nature, fond of contradiction,
The very boon they would petition,
VI Of Juvenal he could make mention.
XXVI The learned world would have me mention
XX Undressed, and opened — ^need I mention? —
The secret she will never mention,
To win her — showed her such attention! 
X Another captured her attention,
The subject, give me your attention:
^'Whose glances, quickening emotion.
To follow you with deep devotion;
When I was young — a mere suggestion ...”
To listen to you, late and soon;
Was love: he sang it late and soon,
Would chide him, would forgive him soon.
That shows a statuette of iron:
The haughty portrait of Lord Byron,
Thus autumn gusts deal death and treason.
When Eugene reached the restless season
The world would gain if it should learn 
Was the sad singer shocked to learn 
Your marked seducer you discern.
With a too wanton kind of fun.
Who vanished like the shades of dawn . . .
The poet in the very dawn
To humble kings and make them fawn.
To have two friends at daggers drawn 
Without a tavern of its own.
When dawn’s fiirst ray had barely shown;
To praises imaccustomed grown.
Stanza XL, Line 4. The reference is to Francesco
Than anything that I could do —
There at her feet, as they would do.
Hold on, old fellow, that will do . . .
”But for a season it will do;
But worse, what now you choose to do!
And if that’s not enough to do,
But, heavens, what am I to do
She then, as love has power to do,
As her good nurse w^ould have her do:
But drops it without more ado.
Greek names, as, for example, Agathon, Philat, Theo- 
I married. Now, I beg you, go.
Be sure you have your grandson go.”
Led me to church. I had to go.
The autumn seemed so loth to go;
Her small wet slipper’s next to go.
"Let’s go.”
"Good-bye, Onegin, I must go.”
From their twin lanterns as they go.
A girl will more than once forego.
Fair Nina Voronskaya, who
gratulations of the venerable poet, Derzhavin, who 
Line 6. Kaverin: an officer of the Hussars who,
^“^the Russian Racine.” Semyonova, an actress who 
A garden river-girt, and lo!
A crowd of nymphs around her — lo!
"Well, shall we start?” The young Othello
Sacred to scions of Apollo!
You have a fever . . .” "Fever, no:
"Ah, then you know him?” "Yes, and no.”
To Olga: "I am happy— no?”
Tatyana should be settled, too.
Before a storm; I wanted, too,
And love’s delicious dream, and, too,
And you, my fair ideal, too,
And tunnels under water, too.
And so the morrow passes, too —
In spite of all oinr efforts, too.
If there w'as carping comment, too;
The Moscow belies are many, too.
Your Olga? And Tatyana too?”
Tatyana, the society lady, is unexplained and too 
A 'wealthy yonth and handsome too;
In flannels and a night-cap too.
Of fables, and a grammar too.
Strange Jean Sbogar enchants her too.
Egypt’s retired corsair too.
Our grandchildren evict us too.
The dedication is addressed to Pyotr Alexandro-
At length our hollow-hearted hero
xliv The sum of all his thoughts is zero,
Lafontaine, a German writer of the period who pro- 
African origin. His great-grandfather, Abram Petro- 
To hapless Tanya . . . Well, and so 
Page 160. "Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain”: the so-
The lily -stem, and withers so
What such a nightmare signifieso 
transition from Tatyana, the provincial miss, to 
him to go into hiding immediately. Annibal retired to 
the Russian ambassador to France is supposed to 
I’ve always thought well suited to 
And trifles of importance to
The foreign tongue is native to
Ambassador is speaking to?
Stanza X/, Lines 3-4. This is a veiled allusion to
Onegin took the letter to
I shall defy the dread ApoUo,
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Tivo
And ivory balls, not more than two.
Chapter Two
Catherine’s reign at the age of ninety-two.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
To earn a luncheon from the two,
They set a table laid for two;
advantage has been taken of a few emendations ap- 
Fluff in his hair, with visored cap
moral purity with that Oriental charm which so cap- 
(I’m certain that you know the chap), 
To roam the forests, green and deep.
There is no calumny so deep.
And night would find her far from sleep. 
Like prisoners released in sleep
Eugene alone goes home to sleep.
They only sent him off to sleep.
Is but to lull dark thoughts to sleep.
Are settled: they are fast asleep;
Their arms about each other, creep 
And gratefully to bed they creep; 
By grove and stream and field and steep — 
She could but peak and pine and weep,
To the low grave, to sit and weep.
But at her window, fain to weep.
in a poem by Pushkin’s uncle, whence the cousinship.
To leave, is gone; they let time slip 
And re-upholstered for the trip.
Impatient, twitch beneath the lamp.
The coachmen round the bonfires tramp.
In dress a pedant and a fop.
Of a most tyrannous young fop.
The perishable human crop.
The masters of the berry -crop.
Upon the couch, a riding-crop.
Which ripens fairly, but to drop;
They dared not let their voices drop:
I share the scalding tears you drop:
No rung would suit him but the top —
A cue rests on the table -top.
Of life’s gay feast ere time is up,
'^Come now, my child, it’s time: get up.
Upon her tray a steaming cup:
Who does not drain the brimming cup,
The hour called ^^entre chien et loup^^^
And it is %^ery hard to bear
A drop of pity, you^ll forebear 
By longing. I am ill, I fear:
"But it’s a bore, my firiend, that’s clear.”
An idle, cheerless recluse, near
Away forever, was so near! . . . 
Afraid to stop: the bear is near;
1811, a year which was also marked by the appear-
And on the lovage dropped a tear.
All during the ensuing year.
By night, in dalliance, sweeter far.
And will accustom us to grammar;
And nurses scream and children roar.
Donning Ms wide-br imm ed Bolivar,
A frontier shattered by the war
Cold ashes hide no smoldering ember;
And Flyanov, somewhat ill, encumber
Along dark streets wrapped deep in slumber
by the editor, to assist the foreign reader.
And her head sinks. The dawn grows bolder, 
And he, reluctant to surrender,
And shun the heart that would be tender.
Deceit exists, but clings with tender 
But ever sadder, ever fonder.
A veritable poet, yonder.
Both carriages and people flounder.
A snowdrift stirs, it falls asunder:
And one thing more put us asunder —
And so God grant them health and cheer!
At Carnival in savory cheer,
And friendly husbands’ heavy cheer?
And notes complexions, with a sneer
A comrade’s promising career,
And closed his turbulent career 
Angel or fiend, as you prefer.
Europe has spurious wines to offer;
And here the regicidal dagger 
And pity took the place of anger.
And in the mist her little finger
Apart, Tatyana can but linger
And an old gentleman espied her,
And if the sudden sight dismayed her.
All speaks of him, but to confound her;
At a soiree. '^God! to see her! . . .
An eiffort to converse with her.
Begged that her husband sniffer her
A haughty general after her.
Before her door; he waits for her;
As on a shaky bench he lays her.
And yet the auguries perplex her.
Etcetera. The glosses vex her.
And while they all are in high feather,
At slaughter, with a heart of leather . . .
But journeys made in wintry weather
But now a kind and simple father,
A man of rank, his worthy father
A friend in need, as you will gather —
A laugh would bring the pair together?
And been a faithful wife and mother.
And w^ept his father and his mother . . .
And there he also wrote another
And found a partner in another.
Be patient, then, as with a brother:
Briefly surveying every tier.
And sleighing, and, when light grew dimmer,
Beside his wife, that chubby charmer.
' ’Dmitry Larin, a poor sinner,
based on Pushkin’s poem, ’^The Caucasian Prisoner.”
And pen; good night.” Her single taper
At noisy gatherings and after.
And covering a yawn with laughter —
A tender father, a good master.
Fate guarded Eugene, our young waster;
A frosty slight; the heavens muster
A gifted talker, he would chatter
And to put finis to their chatter;
(A friendly glass, and friendly chatter
Dear Olga is his only matter.
And I am such. Was it naught better
But wretched is the man who never
Bore to the grave to sleep forever 
As did the bard — yet not aquiver
At table, ’neath the damask cover.
And let his tears unheeded shower;
And looks, and calls him . . . But no power
A guest comes, an indifferent player;
As erstwhile comes, to hum an air
All life before us still lay fair.
Dub you a rogue, which is unfair.
At first but wept and tore her hair.
An ancient, with perfumed gray hair, 
And whispering, make quite a stir:
And neighbor wheezes unto neighbor.
A place for the old-fashioned splendor: 
And why? What am I striving for?
Albeit still a bachelor,
And blesses, as he halts his clamor,
(As was the case, upon my honor.
All rise; he marches to the door.
Crossing the ballroom’s polished floor.
And scrapes his chair along the floor;
Are waltzing round the dancing-floor.
A good landed proprietor,
Ashore at last, and our endeavor 
Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
A pallid swarm, the patients pour:
FARE THEE WELL, AND IF FOR EVER
I’m bored; tell me a story, dear.”
I find the plain home circle dear.
Holding their pious habits dear;
His course no more; but, oh, most dear,
My name . . .” ^'^Yes, but to whom, my dear?
I’ve fallen on black days, my dear —
I was in too much haste, I fear;
I must be growing dull, I fear.
It all, in detail, never fear.
In town), with pots and pans and gear 
In time, my readers, you shall hear
My husband’s folk . . . But do you hear?”
His eyes, how tender, quick and clear.
His heart was pure, his conscience clear;
He found the matter not too clear.
I lose the thread, my mind’s not clear.
Her eyes betray her with a tear.
For just those little slips of grammar;
Malek-Adhel and de Linar,
"He lives in Moscow. Last December
Gay carriages, a goodly number,
^ hen we seek refuge, growing colder.
Her nightgown slips from off her shoulder,
Lorgnette in hand, our friend would wander,
Inscription written: ”Ye surrender 
Husbands esteemed, to you I tender —
He has a single thought to ponder:
li But I am here and he is yonder:
Just fancy who appears from under!
From all the heart holds dear, my blunder
Immersed in it the houses founder;
Its waves on shores that rise up sheer;
Mammas and aunts who pry and peer.
I’ll go!” And he does not defer
Lines 9-10. It has been conjectured that the refer-
Here Pushkin read his verse with swagger.
Having her album there to finger,
If he goes home, his dreams still linger
He loved as people love no longer
His was the love of poets, stronger 
In any small degree betrayed her:
Look back she dare not; fear would blind her;
His magic presence hovers round her;
Found a white picture to surprise her:
In short, and I was proud of her.
His virgin lyric was of her.
He wanted to converse with her
It makes no difference to her.
How once I held her stirrup for her,
His gentle touch nowise dismays her.
Her prudent husband, to distract her.
I pace the beach, await good weather.
"If I were one of those w-ho rather
III He lived in debt, and did not bother
For, sad to say, she loved another:
God’s servant, and a brigadier,
My poet friends, inclined to stammer
Here comes Gvozdin, a first-rate farmer
He died a short hour before dinner.
He erred; for Eugene, hardy sinner.
”Move up the table, give me paper,
I’ll sprinkle you with holy water.
Indeed what can I hope for ^ after
MOSCOW, Russia’s darling daughter,
I’ve married off my younger daughter,
French writer.
It’s plain that here he is the master.
His passing came as a disaster
IX That shine with an harmonious luster . , »
In Say and Bentham for her chatter. 
Her looks, her words — he does not flatter.
His wedding was a settled matter.
My dear, is an important matter:
Hi Too ill for hopes of getting better,
Indeed, he soon received a letter
Kind, cheerful nature, it is bitter
Is lost to us, and he shall never 
For a long time . . . indeed, forever.
He early played the fond deceiver.
I shall not suffer the deceiver
He would not play the base deceiver.
In the smart sanctum, all a -quiver,
It may be Lethe will not cover;
My words may move some unborn lover;
He sang the rose, romantic flower;
His mood no gloomier, no gayer;
Nay, she must hate her brother’s slayer.
He was convinced the fickle fair
Lies spread the famous annual fair.
Many a distant love-affair —
He’s dignified, he dyes his hair.
Here fashionables would repair.
From misty Germany, Vladimir 
In Olga’s presence poor Vladimir
My flighty friend made quite a stir.
I And you, small fruit of eager labor:
He’s read and read, and pray, what for?
I’ve haunted the ballet — what for?
important minor poet and a friend of Pushkin’s. For 
Guests bow and scrape within the door.
His roans bring Lensky to the door;
had resolved to omit this chapter for reasons impor- 
Fear of censorship seems to have been a minor factor; 
Her sad fatigue, her helpless languor.
IV And you who bask in fortune’s favor.
Half-grave, half-gay, and with a flavor 
Kind drones, and you who wisely savor
He finds that no remarks occur
In this opinion all concur.
NECKER
Of all sorts; finally you hear 
No sound, save for the soft slow roar
numeral; but, to avoid scandal, he decided to number 
Off to the country promptly packed her,
No single sound escapes from her;
novel by Charles Nodier.
Of speech? For what malicious laughter 
novel by Mme. Cottin, an eighteenth-century writer; 
No longer fearful of disaster.
New leaves for those the tempests scatter. 
Of Lensky’s troth there was no chatter:
No shadow could be faithfuUer.
Not only did she fail to shiver.
Of life has perished like a flower 
Observed the girl’s embarrassed air.
Of lovely lady, modish sir.
Oblige me! Is it such hard labor?”
Not so his calculating neighbor
No matter— ah, but look with favor
Obeys her feelings sans demur?
OH, YES, what’s FAR AWAY, THAT WE PREFER!
Onegin too. '"^At last, oh, dear!”
Onegin was allowed to hear 
Once Vyazemsky sat down beside her
One cherished fancy for another
Onegin now decides he’ll cater
Onegin leaned above the river
Onegin, frozen with despair.
One heard the crickets’ slender choir.
ONEGIN’S LETTER
She dare not lift, for shame and fear.
She knew, I wonder how. I fear
Or shining with the summoned tear!
Or merely some mistakes in grammar,
Soon, soon my soul will not remember: 
Or by an accidental sneer.
Pussy is what the girls prefer.
Or because Heaven gifted her
She quaked at omens; all around her
Some clue the index may afford her. 
She chides the waters that impede her^
Or native vodka, all together . . .
Onegin, need I ask you whether
So different, first they bored each other.
She was affianced, but her mother
Proud Slav and stout Moldavian muster;
Rousseau (forgive me if I chatter)
Perhaps some lady may find matter 
Over some ordinary matter.
Perchance he briefly knew the fever
Search Russia through, you’ll scarce discover
She will not see him, the betrayer;
She sits with an untroubled air.
Recalling in the soft sweet air
Spoke of divorce in her despair.
Our hero took the marble stair,
Says ’yes’ and ’no,’ but never ’sir.’ ”
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
Pushkin occasionally omitted one or more stanzas, or 
Reciting all their hopes with candor,
Or rouse a journalistic clamor.
Perhaps, heeding the journals’ clamor.
SPEAK ILL OF MOSCOW! THERE’s YOUR TRAVELER!
To Moscow: it’s the brides’ bazaar;
Though Eugene lent a willing ear.
To rest from loads I used to bear.
The lonely gloom was hard to bear.
The loss of it I could not bear.
’Twas thus I sang them — both were dear.
To merchants; we have but one fear:
They like to fill a man with fear.
TO TATYANA Already your reproach I hear.
The shutters closed, the windows blear
To keep his hopeless ledgers clear.
The passer-by may read it clear:
To whom these faces all appear
Where all is silent, dark and drear.
To earn a smile, a dream, a tear.
Will you not come to shed a tear
They took communion twice a year;
Would always give three balls a year;
The fine keen wit of yesteryear 
Together we have traveled far.
Tatyana sets the door ajar . . .
St. Preux, the rival of Wolmar,
Some, honor’s victims, scarred by war,
The dining-room: on chairs they slumber. 
When passion’s fires no longer smolder,
The pair of us had planned to wander,
Why is Tatyana an offender?
The merchant’s wife, so young and slender. 
Still clings to hope, though it be slender.
Upon the azure, pale and tender.
The country to the past is tender.
Where, set in alphabetic order.
Was quite the rustic engineer.
The while Zaretzky with a sneer
Stanza XXI, Originally this stanza ended differ-
The Hindu — diamonds in his coffer;
Though on occasion hke a duffer
This clever jester had to suffer.
Then flash with pride and flame with anger, 
While in due time Monsieur replaced her,
The mooB’s enchantment so obsessed her.
Were signs and warnings to confound her — 
Triquet turns, with his sheet, to her,
The ladies all pressed closer to her;
The shaggy monster seizes her,
The tune, however, threatens her;
The other day in rainy weather
Upon the death of his dear father
told a friend; "who knows, perhaps my grandfather 
The creditors began to gather,
The hostess cries. Guests squeeze together,
The highroad, leveled altogether,
They had their private meetings, whether
’Tis time to loose me from my tether;
to save the other.
They climg as brother clings to brother.
They face Tatyana, who is paler
Such people with each day grow duller.
The spirit of an oddish dreamer.
The hoar-frost in the sun a -shimmer.
The shades of night are growing thinner.
With sighs I think, bemused adorer,
Tatyana, still an early riser,
Stanza XXVI ^ Lines 9-10. Buyanov: a character
This strange and sorry character,
The talk is seasoned well thereafter 
The feast goes on, but soon thereafter
Upon those very boards thereafter.
The nurse replied: "God save you, daughter!”
The room grows loud with talk and laughter, 
The guests, arriving, hear their laughter. 
There Shakovskoy brought noisy laughter
that he had left out of his novel an entire chapter, 
The icy river shows a luster
Viewed by the archive youths w^ho cluster
That fine parquet can never muster.
The general, since such tributes flatter 
The lofty madcap! — but no matter:
The reason doesn’t really matter.)
When they discussed some weighty matter,
that is news — couldn’t be better!
''Then I was younger, maybe better,
Would be in every way far better 
That ardent and most charming letter?
There is no answer to his letter;
"Then, far from Moscow’s noise and glitter.
The crowd, the hubbub, and the glitter!
The theatre’s full, the boxes glitter,
What biting words the rogue would utter
’Twas early he learned how to flutter
With other children scarcely ever.
Who cannot feel: he is too clever.
To fondle either parent never
sion to reproaches and to gibes (which were, however, 
There sings all night; wild roses cover
When two feet tripped toward their lover! 
Where’er it goes, I am its lover:
The nightingale, this season’s lover,
Who was the fair young poet’s slayer?”
Where is the saturnine betrayer,
Their love, though tempests fill the air.
The roofs, the fence, all molded fair;
Unutterably dear and fair.
Tatyana, who spoke each one fair;
The leaps, the heels, the whiskers fair. 
That poetry is their affair.
White hand he swiftly smoothed his hair, 
That morning, gay and debonair.
Where will my naughty lad repair?
When evening comes he will repair.
The women mowing oft repair
To give me over to despair.
To be his relative’s sole heir.
The prisoned girls of the Salgir,
Whate’er was to befall Vladimir,
Tatyana, breathless, caimot stir;
Stood thunderstruck. He could not stir.
To leave . . . Our Eugene could not stir.
Would fly the place: she cannot stir;
’Tis morning; all the world’s astir:
The feast makes every move a labor.
Why thus dispense with lawful labor?
To drink a toast to his fair neighbor,
The box, where, regnant in her splendor.
’Twas not the sort of thing he cared for; 
The feast he was quite unprepared for, 
Such is the news he’s eager for.
Their very slander has no color;
They gossiped on, in high good humor.
Tatyana’s match was ail the rumor;
The theatre’s wicked legislator.
Who tmto every fascinator
To stormy gaiety a traitor,
Would turn quite taciturn with languor, 
The eyeglass of the connoisseur.
The profile that a move will blur
WHERE WILL YOU FIND A BETTER PLACE, GOOD SIR? 
Young Tanya, whom I still hold dear.
What talk of famine, plague, or war?
Your Grandison?” "I can’t remember —
xlix The words of this most earnest pleader:
Whoever you may be, my reader,
xlvii Embellished with a little slander,
Your honor’s most astute defender —
With lowered horns, a lonely deer;
Which nowadays seems somewhat queer.
XU No helping hand is near to lead her
XXI And then a sudden thought possessed her . . .
XIII Of her rough lackey is behind her,
XV Men, while they did not dare pursue her.
X Rejoiced the fair one but to grieve her,
XVil ''From threatened ruin I’ll retrieve her,
What pride, what grief, what thoughts of her!
XXX With the emotions that assail her
Were in no instance trained upon her,
Xviii ”A Larina.” ”Tanya?” ”You’ve met her?”
Xlll If as a husband and a father
When destiny brought us together?
9 What prosy rubbish altogether.
xl The lover, poet, pensive dreamer,
XV And, full of grief, the wistful dreamer
While with his clumsy Russian hammer
When she can only throw cold water 
Wilno. His brother went to Constantinople and after- 
You hear amid the gay street’s fluster
xlix The poor young girl does not pass muster —
Young girls, in passing, hushed their chatter;
XXXlli Alas, these missives fare no better.
xliii How did you take my girUsb letter?
Your version of Tatyana’s letter
xliv You did not like me . . . That was bitter.
XX The gallery claps and stamps, atwitter;
XX But it is late. Above the river.
xix Her eyebrows did not even quiver,
You may rely upon the fair,
Young Olga was the first to stir;
You too, farewell, my curious neighbor.
You shone as with a nuptial splendor:
which described Onegin’s travels in Russia. It was for 
And caught that foot in these two hands;
Aghast at time’s swift slipping sands.
A second, and a third he sends,
A worthy course of action finds: 
And so he’ll rifle keener minds;
And so for days poor Tanya broods.
A Grandison attached to cards,
And smoothly glide on polished boards; 
A beau, a sergeant of the Guards.
Askance at fair, unwonted faces,
Approach!” How calm and cold their faces.
And while my wanton muse rejoices
And now the guests, exchanging glances.
And murmur sing-song confidences,
8 A wicket-gate and broken fences,
And now they bring out eighteen jades.
And of repeating platitudes,
A cottage with two rowan trees,
Aloft, the whole of heaven sees;
A mighty music down the ages.
Across the pane a shadow edges:
And into the deep forest plunges;
And where one falls, another surges . . .
And at the stations lice and roaches
And rash the question that she broaches:
And to a humble cottage dashes:
Along the forest path he crashes.
And fleeing, breaks the lilac-bushes,
A danger to all lovely ladies,
And lifts his hand as who defies
All hustle, bustle, tell great lies,
And so from idle talk she flies.
And hear, above the lake, their cries,
A tavern tribune, chief of rakes.
A gambler who won all the stakes,
Ah, yes, I knew such old wives’ tales,
And sooth, I fled these haughty belles 
And the poor girl is roused betimes
A series of fatiguing scenes.
And to his stand the cabby goes.
All day she roams the woods and mopes.”
As a good comrade, one who shares 
Aplomb, he lifts his eye-glass, stares
A starry host of choiring spheres 
As you discover life’s allures,
Awhile all conversation ceases;
A sudden gust of wind surprises
And with the malice time imposes.
And in our names (and in our verses);
All hope is gone! He leaves, and curses
And then appeared a row of glasses.
Among the crush of people passes,
And bids his servant, since time presses,
Aunt Pelageya still possesses
Another’s joy her heart possesses. 
As he was followed by the blues.
A shadow, or a wife, pursues
And from the servants’ anxious eyes.
And brushes, thirty shapes and sizes.
And all that sparkles, triumphs, sings.
And boasts the freedom of the wings,
As wild as they: forsook her songs 
And girls who kiss with laughs and hugs,
Ah, you are lovely, shores of Tauris,
As though he’s surely done with books.
And steps across; her Mood congeals;
And now she leaps and claps her heels.
A veteran W'ho never fails
And beckon to the passing sails.
A brace of pistols and two balls 
A horrid shout assails the walls
And silhouetted by the beams,
As in a nightmare each one aims
Are certain that it only means 
And when, at midnight, madcap Russians,
About its magic healing fountains,
Are cordial to the country cousins.
Although her book has no pretensions
Alone among his new possessions,
At giddy feasts and wild discussions,
And certain pages (fabrications,
A snare to maids’ imaginations)
After an evening’s dissipations
All secrets safe. Tatyana sleeps.
And as a rural miss appears
At the sad turning of the years,
As one who fought forgotten wars
Accomplished in the end. Three cheers!
As his repellent aid he proffers;
A noise off in the servants’ quarters 
Are all but flowing; her heart flutters,
And where the faithful suitor hovers,
And treading toes, between the chairs 
And Eugene, when he saw these sirs —
And glance, unwilling, in the glass.
All is foreseen: when I confess
A stroke of genius, nothing less.
And thin, but pretty, more or less;
And I’d be happy . . . more or less!
A namby-pamby, colorless
And she, not knowing men are heartless,
At the back porch in readiness,
A pledge of every loveliness.
And his brief look of tenderness —
And a shy maiden’s pure caress.
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
And has she found the word? She lets
As he depicted their delights;
As does proud Moscow, in its rights.
A virgin of ripe years, accepts
Are dazzling, and rejoice our hearts.
And empty — so it seems to us . . .
Ay is risky, if delicious;
And old companions, dull and vicious;
As suddenly grew timorous,
And crosses black with flocks of daws.
A land imagination hallows:
And tedious planned holidays.
And then at home all day he stays
And most, the linden-shaded ways
All labor, took to pensive ways; 
And talk that brighten’s friendship’s ways.
And on their skates the merry boys
AND FROM THERE TO THE CAUCASUS:
Announce the coming of his bales.
Ay, when, foaming gold, it hisses . . .
Beneath her pillow, empty playthings;
And Kura’s and Ajragva’s banks
And with my vanished spring, it seems,
And nightmares and hallucinations.
At first these were but machinations
6 As first I saw you there before us
And there beside the rocky shallows
and reads as follows:
Bearing her jar o’er creaking snows;
Anna’s reign, Annibal, who had incurred Biihren’s 
BE THOU SPARED THESE FEARFUL DREAMS,
Beneath the shade of his acacias
By grandmammas and grandpapas.
Best leeches send him to the spas.
But all too soon the summer ends.
But the provincial town affords 
But as the rural dusk advances
But you, chance volumes that in Hades
Behind a stump among the trees
Diviners and Chaldean sages.
By Lensky and his love; light flashes;
carried with it a suggestion of subversive tendencies.
Didelot enjoyed his victories
But knew the most amusing stories
Cherries and red raspberries.
But ere ’tis open, fades and crumbles.”
But stepping forth she slips and tumbles;
Down to the waterfront there stumbles
Do not spy upon our games.
Each morning by the Moscow chimes,
Come seek the stream that slowly goes 
Beside that most superb of creatures,
But her soul aches, and nothing pleases.
But hush! Our sternest critic rises
Beyond, the Caucasus’ tall masses,
Beside the window. So life passes . . .
Eugene berates them, rolls his eyes.
But, rain or shine, each day his coach is
Behold the Russian tents in ranks.
duced one hundred and fifty sentimental novels.
But I grow old, and memory fails;
Custodian of the desert, fills
Emotion is for clowns and fools.
Coquette believes; the old man dreams 
century French author, known for his aphorisms.
But now the blue of evening darkens.
Debates and friendly conversations;
Because society’s conventions,
Beneath her pillow. Darkness keeps 
Beneath the light of stars and lamps.
Entreaties, vows, and foolish fears.
But Tanya, dreaming, hardly hears,
Deceit and gossip, rings and tears,
But brings to mind our fading years 
Bleak tete-a-t^te concludes; he cheers 
Each man must do as he prefers —
But spend three hours before the glass,
Brief as your footprints on the grass.
But his grave illness, I confess,
Complaint will make my pain no less.
Content, since habit, more or less,
Eugene flings wide the door: defenseless.
By too-sweet tea, the ladies’ meekness, 
Delight is mingled with distress
By words and looks insidious
But the proud princess, cold and serious,
Enchanting, sparkling, frivolous.
By any wife who’s virtuous.
Before the threshing-floor, thick willows 
By the young Olga’s winning ways,
Be thrilled upon Elysian ways 
But keep to their familiar ways:
by Zhukovsky, an older friend of Pushkin’s.
EUGENE ONEGIN GOES
habit of sacrificing strangers to Artemis, contended as 
Is but the wistful moon’s, alas! . , «
His son, Lieutenant General I. A. Annibal, was
father’s luxurious life, his nineteen brothers — he was 
it. The last of these reads:
Invite her, kiss her, press her hands.
Into the flooded meadowlands.
Fluff up her hair as style commands.
I’ll not debate the point. Ye gods!
Fat merchants, Cossacks, boulevards,
It means the people to whose faces
Is slobbered over bit and traces.
He waits: and up a troika prances,
How heavenly, as she advances,
Is he from Heaven or from Hades?
In vain a Moscow on her knees 
Its splendor among ancient trees,
Forward, with groan and grunt he lunges,
Have your own horses pull your coaches,
He does not heed the mind’s reproaches,
Glimpsing behind the distant bushes 
Her dowdy frocks, and to their mercies 
in the guise of reproach, lauds Louis XIV. Our ladies 
He pours out fluent melodies;
He had no itch to dig for glories
Itself upon its memories.
In mischief, but horrific stories 
For worldly shows and vanities.
I boxed your ears! I gave you cakes!”
He comes: a cork pops, up it goes.
For all her future social cares 
First, memory would trace the features,
In secret, of dear distant creatures.
[i-vij A woman’s love for us increases
Her darkening eyes she never raises;
In winter, when night’s shade encloses
Her flaxen hair, her graceful poses.
Her sky-blue eyes, her cheeks like roses,
Here, bonneted and wearing roses,
Infer, then, with what thorny roses
His madness — and again immerses 
Into the woods, pursued, she presses;
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Eugene Onegin: Notes
For the wild steppes’ barbaric tongues,
Good readers: a new face arrives.
From here he watched with thoughtful eyes
I’d like to see with my own eyes
Hoping to sell his worthless nags;
Here too the plainsman comes and brags,
He did not know that books could say things
Is alien to my breast, and brings
In turn Ms fickle flattery brings.
French prelate who was Napoleon’s chaplain; his 
How oft on the dark shores of Tauris
For army service; kept the books;
He’s done with women, and it looks 
Early editors substituted this name for the asterisks 
Excerpts from Onegin's Travels
Her flowers, her romantic novels,
I call on freedom — ^naught avails:
I’m sad and cold, and yet it seems 
His door he locks, his lamp he trims.
IV Of making certain grand concessions
Have they arrived? His calculations
He talked about the wealth of nations;
Have there been any conflagrations?
It causes frenzy, aberrations.
figure in the early editions.
Fine ladies, military fops.
Is now our hero’s, it appears.
High tragedy and swoons and tears,
Farewell! Forever, or for years?”
He’d suffered j&rom such things for years.
His housekeeper for forty years,
He comes upon her, as he enters.
How jfirmly her attention centers
Goethe and Schiller were his masters.
He was none of your poetasters,
Her trailing skirt, with hand that quivers;
^^His days and dreams what man recovers?
In Russia, where for lack of historical memoirs,
His life, that knew no cares or labors,
God helped; complaints did not embarrass
For honor could require no less.
In talk of love. It was thought shameless — 
Is it because her love is artless.
Grow fond — out of sheer idleness.
He cannot give me happiness.”
Is surrogate for happiness.
I was not bom for happiness;
Here was a man who had a weakness
For a few books, a wilderness
He dares to trifle with a tress
I’d bring you nothing but distress.
Her work the crackling matchwood lights,
For rustic freedom thus delights,
For the good-byes; the turn-out waits. 
Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Frost glistens. Mother Winter’s arts
From our good friends, may Heaven save us!
From hesitancy strove to wean us.
For there’s a lack of taste in us.
Even a man of honor: thus
He sees forgotten foes, malicious 
He first abandoned you, capricious
It’s like a mistress, gay, capricious,
Is like a copy pale and vicious,
Is hushed. Alone the angry chorus
Herself to love and all its laws.
Her heart, and when she likes, 'withdraws, 
Gray skies, and heaps of straw in billows
How many swiftly flitting days 
Is for the good old-fashioned ways.
Forgetting friends and city ways
Familiar hills, familiar alleys.
"Farewell, you dear and peaceful valleys,
He’s sent to doctors, the Neva’s
Her tender voice is like a reed’s.
JA MORALE EST DANS LA NATURE DES CHOSES.
mirable poetic talent from being a fine critic) has 
'nine,’ and to sacrifice one of the final stanzas:
Not aiming yet, advance four paces.
li The blare, the lights, the shining glances.
list, author of a satire on writers of odes.
My handsome house and my soirees —
Line up with children of all ages:
Lamenting in new songs and dirges 
Just now our roads are bad for coaches;
Looks backward; lightning-like she rushes 
Nor bends to fashion’s tyrannies:
Nor noisy games, nor foreign beauties.
Not hours when he fulfilled the duties
Just to enjoy the obsequies.
Just grown-up mischief-makers’ games.
Like those whom an old feud inflames.
Merrily^ my laughing ones.
My student cell grew bright with treasures
Now different scenes delight my senses:
Lives there a poet who rehearses
My soul’s fair crystal, what surpasses
My lips were envious of their blisses!
Lensky can scarcely trust his eyes.
My youth fled by, remembrance clings.
Like secret promenades in sleighs;
K., who is so well known for the playfulness of his 
Now serpentine she twists and wheels,
Like a Bacchante at the revels.
May pay attention to his nails;
Leaps for a knife, and Lensky falls;
Mashuk, most health-giving of mountains;
My childish dreams, my tender years,
Not like a cool coquette w^ho tenders
Let me look back. Farewell, then, bowers
Line 14* Written during the author’s exile in Bess-
My thanks for all the hours of gladness,
ment worthy of Childe Harold. M. Didelot’s ballets 
left one unfinished, indicating the gap either by dots 
Like fevers it can burn and freeze us.
Not knowing you, I would not thus
Line 11. Lei: a Slavonic divinity, of dubious
Love’s discourse, perilous, delicious,
Lions on gates with great stone jaws,
Nor from his greedy lips withdraws 
name by Mme. de StaS.
The crooked trunks, the gleaming claw^s.
named after the South American liberator, which was 
The little feet and lovely limbs;
Straight to the stranger Tanya speeds,
Of loud farewells and crying maids;
Then, hurry, hurry to the fields!
Obeying the spring sun’s commands,
She speaks to them as to old friends.
Then, at a party he attends
The dream pervades her mournful moods.
Parks, pharmacies, Bohkarans, guards.
The blithest dawn in sullen clouds.
Thus darkly drives the storm that shrouds 
The horns and hoofs, the whiskered faces,
She pinched her waist with tightened laces,
Remarks the jew^els and the laces,
The frozen corpse Zaretzky places.
The bony hands, the sly grimaces;
Two fluffy furrows as it races;
Their daughters, after due embraces.
She lost her Frenchy airs and graces;
The bold hihitka swiftly traces
Of finding worn-out prejudices.
The Horse Guard’s spurs clank as he dances;
They take her to the Club for dances.
Pursued in flight by flaming glances;
Of Moscow beaus and Moscow Circes!
On themes to which none now alludes,
The house hummed like a hive of bees
On all but him! She never sees 
Or Seneca’s, or Byron’s pages,
Of letters running to six pages.
The two Skotinins, gray as sages.
She likes the talk of haughty sages
Perchance he would have earned the wages
The grandfathers it promptly urges.
’Tis time to seek the southern surges
The crunch of snow . , « a step approaches;
The time of tempting nights approaches,
Than in the north Aurora’s blushes.
She rises as the morning flushes
To free its wings, and frantic, pushes
The dawn shines ruddy; Olga rushes 
played Shakespearean roles and acted in the tragedies 
The nightingale’s keen melodies
The fierce flames reddening the skies.
Scarce breathing, making no replies,
The princess, and her feeble cries 
Their nags, huts, mansions, monasteries,
To play with tender reveries.
She was not one of those who glories
Old W’omen, boys with cheeks like cherries,
Since you were christened? Gracious sakes!
To hang upon the young bloods’ tales.
The poisonous vUe worm that mumbles
Stanza XXVII, Line 8. The song is by Charles
Of idle youth that no one blames,
Neva, but in those warmer climes 
Sits down; the game is done — ^he goes;
On every single suitor’s hopes?
Our sorrows and our smaller cares,
The child while still at play prepares
Stanza V, Line 13. The reference is to Very Freres,
Of youthful pranks and childish pleasures, 
Of Cleopatra, but whose features.
Of plates and silverware increases,
Steel files and combs of various guises,
Then you will weep, but who supposes
To his dear charmer his own verses?
Of Sundays, putting on his glasses,
That riots through the mountain passes;
The peddler plods, the merchant dresses,
The lovely ladies’ filmy dresses.
To her dear hero she addresses.
The billows covered them with kisses,
Onegin flies to taste the blisses
That even thirteen-year-old misses
Or greet a luckless Phedre with Msses,
The servants gather at the gates 
Our talkative young eremites;
Pushkin provided the novel with a number of notes,
^^Qu^ecrirez-vous sur ces tablettes?^^
’Twas in a word the Russian blues.
Our Lensky’s village, lives and thrives,
Through spectacles, with failing eyes,
To mist her wide and tender eyes.
To say, with sorrow in her eyes:
On foreign scenes to feast our eyes;
The foes stood by, with downcast eyes.
She shuddered, mute; her lovely eyes
The Muse first shone before my eyes.
The sudden soimd of hoofs! . . . She freezes.
The lazy Orient longer dozes.
Persian poet’s writings.
To her to whom his heart belongs,
The chance to read his modest songs 
The parlor’s crowded; barking pugs,
Stanza XII, Lines 7-11, Melmoth: the reference is
The balcony where such a press is,
or by giving merely the number of the stanza. It is 
Page 161. "Egypt’s retired corsair”: during his
Remained his friends, I grant you this.
Soon brought us, if you please, to Paris,
To answer when the lady speaks.
Thus a poor moth imprisoned seeks
Onegin fumbles as he seeks 
She pickled mushrooms with her cooks;
Stanza /F, Line 4. Levshin: author of many works
The bear is marching at her heels.
Oneginas Travels
The country life, the rustic hovels.
She falls . . .
The bear says: '^Here my gossip dwells.
Two-legged millions are our tools;
Stanza XV. This discarded stanza is extant in ms.,
The splendid mansion shines and gleams, 
They still can thrill me in my dreams.
Of youth renewed beside these streams.
This Martin Zadeka, it seems,
The crowd whose sparkle nothing dims,
To an ambitious author’s whims:
The relatives — and there are dozens —
Ripe daughters, dressed in last year’s fashions. 
The sharks who feed on gamblers’ passions
not clear what moved him to make these omissions. 
Such are the bard’s gratifications;
This subject filled his conversations.
These were the secret fond traditions
pearing in later editions.
To holding poets’ sweet inventions.
The beau monde*s burdensome conventions
pointed out to us that the omission, though perhaps 
Of fools, and slyly whispered quips ...”
She glides; and now serenely stops,
The heart recalls its ancient scars,
There is a roaring in her ears . . .
Of her own heart’s shy hopes and fears;
She suffocates; she scarcely hears
Tatyana in the court appears,
The two friends’ greetings; and the tears 
To these long letters and these tears.
Tatyana cannot stop her tears.
The tread of passion augurs tears:
The pranks and jokes of former years.
The stalls are seething, the pit roars,
The curtain rustles as it soars;
Tatyana like a child surrenders 
That no hope of renewal cheers?
Then all is changed. For lo! she veers,
She looks about, with heart that flutters:
She walks ahead. The old crone mutters:
Prevail. Two words she softly mutters, 
She drops her handkerchief, and shivers,
The traveler observes and shivers 
Tatyana moans, and as she shivers
The horse who scents him snorts and quivers,
Through silent woods, and she discovers 
She wanders with imagined lovers
Then plunged into domestic labors:
Rolled by in peace; sometimes the neighbors
'^To me, Onegin, all these splendors.
To make a man feel like an ass,
The image trembling in the glass
Till from his dressing-room he’d pass.
The happiness of youth must pass.
The cold pretensions to success.
poet” mentioned in a lyric entitled, ”To the Goddess 
Thus people, frankly I confess,
Suspicious age could do no less,
Of this cold world, his soul would bless 
The poor girl stands there, almost senseless;
The tender torments, and the sadness, 
That man alone knows blessedness 
She lacks the look of snobbishness,
The source of tears and happiness.
The soul so shy of happiness;
The heart with virgin tenderness?
The flash of wit, the flouncing dress.
Or kiss the hem of her dear dress.
This giddy play in fancy-dress.
Stanza IX. In preparing the text for the press
The glitter of the noisy press.
Of this and that, to his distress;
The treasure none can ever guess,
The album of a country miss,
Two slender boughs are flung across
The waters, where they boil and toss;
Of her researches quite forgets
The friend of wintry cottage nights.
Triquet; next follow two adepts:
Their monocles that rake the guests.
Show off their impudence, their vests.,
stranger she accosts.
of the carriage, was knocking against the mile-posts 
That have come down the years to us 
The times improve, and better us!
Oblivion is waiting for us
So fortune-telling’s not for us.
The well-known clubman, who, God bless us, 
The other slowly circles, thus,
Plants cabbages like old Horatius,
Then wafted as by Eolus
Since the dead days of Romulus.
Old duelist can be malicious:
The gossips ever are malicious,
Though there are people, most malicious,
Or is stupidity malicious —
”Too late,” he thinks. ”And then that vicious
Stanza XXIV, Lines 2-9, Among us, euphonious
The queen, aloof, remote, imperious.
0 Rus!
The sounding waves’ eternal chorus,
The tails and tusks and bloody jaws.
On down to where the river flows.
The vintage of the comet flows.
Shorter and shorter grew the days;
The tinsel of unwelcome days,
The noble taste of bygone days.
Of tulle she wore in other days;
The glories of these frosty days.
That to such matters Homer pays.
Sad murmurs filled the woodland ways
The simple girl whose dreams, whose ways.
Of her demure provincial ways,
To tender him the Kremlin keys.
The imps and cupids, quick as monkeys,
She shared our banquets, crowned our joys —
Tatyana’s
Such faithful friendship as my hero’s
Stanza /F, Line 7. Lenore: the heroine of Burger’s
THEN ONEGIN VISITS TAURIS:
Where Tanya’s met with ”oh-s” and ”ah-s,” 
When writing his extravaganzas
You seek: be it extravaganzas 
Whatever in these careless stanzas
Tumansky in sonorous stanzas
The story of these fragmentary stanzas,
Why set two ages thus at odds?
When every walk fresh wonders yields;
What the word relatives embraces.
xlvi From head to foot, and Moscow’s Graces
We’ll listen to the forest voices.
What languor in her magic glances!
XIV A lady down the room advances,
Yet soon they let down their defences.
Vll And the assorted ranks and ages,
Who would not tire of threats and rages,
With lampions bright on sills and ledges
We’ll split apart the mountain ridges,
We shall have arched, cast-iron bridges
Unbidden guests; the scene abashes 
the remembrance of remarkable men soon vanishes, 
XXviii And off into the fields she rushes,
XXX You tomes wherewith resplendent ladies
With his sardonic comedies;
With rosy light the eastern skies,
Upon the parlor sofa lies
Whose shade across the mill-pond lies 
What hidden meaning in it lies.
They glow, they burn, the ecstasies
We’re put to sleep by moral tales;
With chairs and chests and casseroles,
Tulchin, where the Spring shines betimes. 
W hen he comes, ah, when he comes.
With proud perukes and red-heeled shoes.
vii She stoops, she falls, her struggling ceases;
XXXli Of elegy that he despises.
With flashing eyes Onegin rises
With olden days and doddering nurses:
Upon the table gleam the glasses,
With them, a red-wigged man in glasses:
Up through the flue the pipe -smoke passes; 
very just and witty). The author frankly confesses 
With utmost speed Onegin dresses,
While into town the milkmaid presses, 
XIV A branch leans down to snare her tresses,
They rouse are those of youthful kisses, 
With splendor unaccustomed eyes.
Unheeded in her great dark eyes.
With stormy passion’s heat she blazes;
The State for long; the course of things 
Where Russia’s czar was king of kings.
Where, in the shadow of the wings.
very advanced age Annibal remembered Africa, his 
versationalist, who was a life-long friend of his.
to Petersburg without leave and went straight to his 
Upon her shamed and flaming cheeks;
To scan the flags and see what sails 
Wherein agreeable vice prevails.
With most folk, custom’s rule prevails.
Was wooed by passionate young devils*
Will square accounts, whoever falls.
Within, a noisy clatter swells;
Towers above the craggy hills,
With jams and featherbeds and bowls.
Was the interpreter of dreams.
With other days come other dreams,
1 7 The Orpheus to whom Europe hearkens.
Vague threats, predictions, and suspicions,
Who will recall my poor creations.
XV Find notes piled Mgh. What? Invitations?
Why do you pay me these attentions? 
xlv As bored as I with vain inventions —
XIV We think all other people zeros,
With scorn; yet smiles upon the lips 
With noisy haste the throng decamps;
You’ll grant it’s time to part, my dears.
With flame that fails as it appears;
xlvi The homage that the gay world tenders,
Upon the sharp -clawed paw he offers,
With cocks in cages (these one slaughters
XXXll Upon her tongue the wafer quivers —
XXlll A glance upon their urgent lovers.
xlvi But lulled by the fond dream that dowers
Where she, with God knows who for neighbors.
What dazzling hopes awhile are yours.
Yawned through the long thanksgiving mass,
Where did she learn this wild excess?
''What notions! You may find it blameless.
Would show him every friendliness; 
With most polite and cool address,
Who is inspired in his distress:
Will look with scorn on my distress!
With blotted rhyme and criss-cross kiss — 
You men who lived in wedded bliss
With pure devotion, knew no bliss 
wrote a group of "Crimean Sonnets.”
There Pestel ... for the tyrants . . .
The flying hours no one counts.
The fearful bill, unheeded, mounts.
We need the wit that nature gave us 
Yes, jealousy’s attacks can seize us
When we see him nearing us.
W hy did you come to visit us?
Who will not spread vile lies about us? 
Who will not seek our faults to flout us?
The friend of Bacchus, Mars, and Venus,
xlii Indeed, today there is a vicious
Xli 'When they proclaim you odd or vicious,
Who called him everything that’s vicious 
We can’t please the fastidious.
With kindly hand the old man’s bays.
You made me drunk in other days.
Whose heart belonged to other days.
You who will smooth in after days
Upon the good old-fashioned ways 
XXll While in the lobby sleepy flunkeys
Upon whose brows methought was hell’s 
was a schoolmate and an intimate friend of Pushkin’s.
XVI I feel, if not indeed a lover’s.
gift to Peter the Great, who had him baptized at 
Is half a crane and half a cat.
Ah, once how fast my heart would beat
By hate and dread, and strongly beat 
With dancing blood, with living heat.
Compelled young boughs, in sultry heat,
A gossip, glutton, clown, and cheat,
Who likes a bribe as much as meat.
And the word’s new — should not be great.
These guests, and somehow keeps her seat.
Stanza XV ^ Line 10. Bolivar: a black silk top hat,
To classicism doffed my hat:
kin was addressing not Shishkov, but Wilhelm, that 
A haughty skeleton, and that
(The image, why, of this and that:
With easy grace of this and that.
These friends! ’tw^as not for nothing that 
written at all. For a sample of the material that 
lana,” the heroine makes the same preparations that 
Here’s the exordium. That’s that!
A cosmopolitan — or what?
With his red belt and sheepskin coat.
They came into my mind so pat.
I quote myself, and do it pat).
But silent as a sage he sat
You prove you know, beyond a doubt,
Before her now, without a doubt:
By God! I wish I could retract.
The letter to you quite intact.
Slight errors have a choice effect.
Stanza XLIX^ Line 1. The reference is to a select
Tatyana does, expecting that the mirror will reflect 
We show at aU times due respect,
And whom we kiss as they expect,
The sound of Russian when correct;
combine enlightenment with amiability, and strict 
Black chasm were gaping at her feet . . . 
And quite as faithless as their feet.
With anguish, pour out at your feet 
Three pairs of truly pretty feet.
And that between her teeth, to greet 
To cast forced shade upon the street.
Their looks enchant, their words are sweet, 
”But ruin at his hands is sweet,”
Such treachery who could forget?
Where go, you madman, to forget?
Of those he wished her to forget!
Hope of a name none might forget.
The game he can at last forget;
Before it’s heard, is grave and quiet.
Enough! My soul is calm and quiet
7 I am an altered man and quiet.
Thus to rush forth, then lapse in quiet
I like a life of country quiet;
But now it’s time for the ballet.
The prima donna? The ballet?
ence is to Thomas Raikes, an Englishman who met 
Two merchants have already met.
ance of a comet.
XVll To come, as from another planet,
To see a pedant in a bonnet!
xlv Princess Yelena wears the bonnet
Xlll I shall yet cease to be a poet;
XXXIX But he has not become a poet,
The cordial words: 'There was a poet!” 
Left of the village where the poet
Like Byron, pride’s consummate poet;
That argues a resourceful poet,
Stanza XX, Line 14, Anton Delwig, a minor poet,
And having noted, in a pet.
Upon the granite parapet.
which have been preserved in a secret 
And does not cease to pine and fret.
New sorrows come, my heart to fret;
With ecstasy, but with regret.
The olden sorrows I regret.
By tiresome rhymes and vain regret,
For carefree youth knows no regret.
Of high desires and deep regret,
Strange faces mid the painted set.
Beside the fire a table’s set.
Now on what flowers are they set?
Beside my quiet lake, beset 
That poor Tatyana was upset.
What time it is with no Breguet 
Pops; the wine fizzes; and Triquet,
Stanza X, Line 6. In Zhukovsky’s ballad, ^^Svet-
Be she? It is . . . But no . . . And yet . . .
To the kind invalid, and yet 
Life’s vista gleams before it yet.
Below, though it is early yet,
The rustic cyclop labors, daft,
At Europe’s dainty handicraft,
And oh, they are a weary weight!
Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
The moon has risen; in a light 
When with diaphanous pale light
The heavens glow with azure light.
And likes the pallid evening light
At dawn, by Cytherea’s light.
Upon the distant hills lay light.
Schiller, of course, by candle-light.
From porch to court, and shadow-light 
In to her sister, swallow-light;
And soon the east will be alight;
He sang life’s bloom and early blight:
He offered solace and delight,
He knew one torment, one delight
Take what is offered of delight.
Now sleeps the scion of delight.
Of distance, promising delight;
The guests are greeted with delight;
She looks on nothing with delight.
Dark Melmoth fills her wuth delight;
She flies, she flies, nor in her flight 
His knowledge of the tongue was slight:
My fondness for it is but slight;
To choose such moral tales as might 
She sighs, she pines both day and night!
The moon is fading with the night;
A fairy tale that lasts the night,
Through empty day and idle night:
The mystic, wistful hours of night;
No breath disturbs the warm still night.
So turning morning into night,
The Vampire wrecks her sleep at night;
The view into the moonlit night.
You are an early bird! Last night
And slept beside her every night.
Here’s what you find there (am I right?) :
He looked them over, boxed them right,
In dust . . . But there the skies are bright; 
Her rosy cheeks are not less bright
And the smooth waters, mirror-bright,
I left you in a dreadful fright;
of our critics, ”that boys are ice-skating.” Right.
That ancient glory still shines bright . ,
Thus a gray hare will quake with fright 
The naked woods surprise the sight,
From shipboard looming on the sight
However dazzling to the sight.
His nineteenth year was scarce in sight.
The menu hangs there, in plain sight.
Decipher epigraphs at sight.
The harbor is a busy sight;
Against the palm that holds it tight: 
But no! the whole thing came to naught.”
Have cards and dice; and not for naught 
The maxims her mamma has taught.
She must accept at last, I thought.
And tells her doll with anxious thought
Tatyana fills his every thought;
The landed gentleman has brought 
As only passion can have wrought.
It’s misery, and who can cure it?”
Just think, this joy, I can’t endure it.
He waved his hand, as one who’d rue it
But oh, how deeply we must rue it.
''Princesses ’Tachettel I can’t believe it!”
xli ”How long do you remain?” ^Conceive it!”
tant to him, not to the public. Some fragments of it 
Than face them; he who has gone through it
But now I am fed up with it;
To take the letter up and seal it 
Dawn’s air is sweet, she does not feel it.
''Can it, indeed,” thinks Eugene, ''can it
I’d give my house and all that’s in it.
He turned a partial eye on it.
They do not change, depend upon it.
Pray God I do not come upon it
No punishment is equal to it.
Beside the fire and hum to it 
Xi That we were hourly faithless to it,
Were bliss; and death? I should not fear it!
And never after that went near it.
Will not debate and ponder it
"I shan’t detain you; but where is it
”How Tanya’s grown! Why, how long is it
love with someone?” ”But who is it?
’^Has he forgotten us — what is it?
”The fireplace, miss, please look at it — 
To make a guest exclaim at it.
She sees . . . Why, who would credit it? 
Deep tenderness; perhaps he meant it.
Or somehow couldn’t quite prevent it.
And was at Olga’s ere he knew it!
The verses came — but who would know it? —
There is the spot if you would know it:
That here, for all the world to know it,
When I am gone, and cannot know it.
Ail this is futile, and you know it,
The days speed by; before you know it
”Then bid your grandson — don’t delay it —
”God knows how gladly, only say it . . .”
The gathering, affected by it
The silent fields, abandoned, wait,
To hurry them: he cannot wait.
Farewell, proud palace! But why wait?
And terror-stricken would await
And both, though young, could but await
A tedious season they await
For Olga’s album — not a bit!
In colored silks a pattern fit 
In grave seclusion as is fit.
You may dismiss them as unfit
And epigrams that scored a hit.
Regent’s army; he returned to Russia with a split 
Described the town; we must admit.
And what a throat! And what a spirit! . . .
To know you: spirit tuned to spirit;
Long evening pass, while he would sit 
Above the chess-board they will sit.
’Twas here the master used to sit.
Is it because we like to sit
About the table monsters sit!
For (as I’ve said) there he must sit 
XXvi And Petushkov’s. We had a visit
Then Olga’s suitor paid a visit.
'^These poets! What! another visit?”
She hears it all at every visit.
That bodes full flowers and honeyed fruit. 
And search my nonsense for some wit.
Because rash ardor and quick wit
Griboyedov’s famous comedy, Woe From Wit.
There is no sparkle here of wit;
To his sharp judgments, sullen wit.
Onegin a pure rapture felt.
And as on these his fancy dwelt,
Where entertainment was but scant;
Here dandies now in the ascendant
For whom, Tatyana, is it meant?
Asked what Onegin’s visit meant,
His mare scents snow upon the pleasant
The lifting mist reveals the pleasant
He wakes to find a note — that’s pleasant:
A nice old woman, plain but pleasant.
Slapped servant-girls who were unpleasant;
And resolute, she shipped the peasant
Be quick! Drive on!” he bids the peasant;
The shepherd’s horn awakes the peasant;
Here’s winter! . . . The triumphant peasant
li To them . . . alas, some now are distant,
of these novels was Adolphe^ by Benjamin Constant.
attached a note in which, after quoting some relevant 
But for one thing he had a bent,
Or does he follow his old bent 
When all the foreign cooks were bent 
Made game of fools, and being bent 
I have seen other belles who bent
On elegance her mind w^as bent.
His head above her fondly bent,
Than that you sought, poor innocent. 
And here hussars on leave, resplendent
Shall I depict less with a prudent
XXlll The cabinet where fashion’s student
And grow, with time, intelligent.
Would scarcely call intelligent.
When writing that intelligent,
Could hoodwink the inteUigent;
Quit of the shore’s dull element?
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
His principal accomplishment;
Himself back to his regiment.
Whispers an outworn compliment,
No grace, no flash of merriment.
No syllable of sentiment.
By some obscure presentiment.
The subject of an argmnent?
And roam the sea’s expanse, unpent.
Was it not thus I long since spent
On other paths, since youth is spent,
Self-centered and indifferent.
The letter’s ready to be sent;
name of another friend of Pushkin’s which is absent 
The prince invites him to be present 
was among those present.
Pray whom now does he represent?
They married her sans her consent.
Not far from Bonaparte’s tent.
Themselves to find out his intent.
My youth in slothful sweet content?
But those good friends who were insistent
Her heart assailed, where’er she went 
To Olga’s voice: away she went,
In silence, hearing still the faint
Sad murmur of the soul’s complaint.
When he was calling on an aunt 
The dazzling capital, forgot —
Remind him of a face forgot.
The world, the ball, are both forgot,
The call of fame, for you forgot 
Was to be readily forgot.
Upon the table, piping hot;
Forget the feelings that held riot
My thanks. Alike in peace and riot 
Well I remember waves in riot
Iv There fancies bloom and dreams run riot —
A bigot seem — a patriot —
At heart, giving a single jot.
That she’s ideal — he must jot 
Designed for you so sad a lot!
The poet is no more ... his lot
My country, and an exile’s lot —
lerina; she danced in a ballet, arranged by Didelot, 
My worthy friend. Monsieur Guillot.
In runs his valet, prompt Guillot,
And with the spark of a bon mot
Because he could make no bon mot.
good living and high thinking. The name does not 
For all their views and passions not,
Deep truths, or well-drawn scenes — yet not
"Forgive me. Prince, but can you not
The cruel fates have surely not 
Into the stream her red-webbed foot,
Glimpse of Terpsichore’s sweet foot. 
There is a quickening at the root
The vapor wreathes the china pot.
And in that far and savage spot
A poem to her on the spot.
The girl, stands rooted to the spot*
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot;
Between Lafitte and Veuve Cliquot, 
Could not wash down with Veuve Cliquot
Round old Moet or Veuve Cliquot; 
The moon her magic vigil kept.
He thought the tomes his daughter kept
And while the world in silence slept.
To move you even while you slept;
The world without, Tatyana crept.
And there she stayed, and wept, and wept.
Relating with romantic art
Late nights, yes, and a facile art;
And his the charm of simple art.
Some fragment of his Northern art.
Secure a tryst with tender art,
With motley figures: people dart
Such feelings in this troubled heart,
His were the dreams that move the heart
Catch the first stirrings of the heart.
The girlish secrets of the heart,
Whose secret solace on the heart
He’d have disarmed the youthful heart.
A tumult in the Russian heart!
And faster, faster throbs her heart.
No feast, no gift to warm his heart:
To praise his mind if not his heart,
That burdened my Tatyana’s heart! 
Would cite a verse he had by heart,
Has held the first place in my heart.
And found his comments sane and smart.
Fresh grief would cause a keener smart —
But business holds the greater part.
To which we vowed our walks apart,
Fruit of spoiled years, or green and tart,
Tanya surveys it with a start.
Forgive me: Tanya, from the start,
Instead of bristling at the start —
Moscow: those syllables can start
Pray, did your ceaseless clamor start
They chase the dogs away, alert
And no calumnious friend so pert
As some time later to assert
And ail would relish the report
To flowery field and village sport,
And shrewdly held his peace; in sport
With laughter and with noisy sport.
She looks about in puzzled sort.
That I am not Onegin’s sort;
Her dreamy mood did not consort
And sometimes neatly made retort.
Lest the young lady should be hurt.
And enters the deserted court.
A soldier’s, wins us friends at Court,
As at a mighty funeral feast;
In soul, of all the guests the least 
For all your great gifts and your least, 
Looks round: the bear is gone, at least; 
And lands remote, where on the breast
Nor soothes the ache within her breast.
Poor Tanya’s youth is fading fast,
And gains the brookside, breathing fast.
In elegiac mood, at last 
Off in a narrow lane, at last.
Away, the good old sleigh, at last. 
And lives like a true sage at last,
And wore the funeral wTeath at last.
Observe it with a yawn at last,
And rootless dreams that could not last,
Has found a refuge from the blast 
As a fit sequel to the roast:
Be fact, and can my spring be past 
Of intimacies of the past.
Her virgin calm is of the past;
And silently recall the past?
But, Muse, you must forget the past.
’’Farewell, the days of peace are past; 
Just now a walk w’ould suit me best.
And, feeling they had done their best,
But she was slow of wit at best.
Of snow, and wash her face and chest.
An escort much, puffed out his chest 
A living picture, or a jest.
May his soul now be with the blest.
Are glad at last to take a rest:
In time I shall relate the rest.
And raised his nose above the rest.
As I am, too, a little rest:
Betrayed — he took a welcome rest. 
Of memory, or welcome rest,
And in the grave his bones have rest!”
And blessed the darkness bringing rest.
Roused at her wonted hour from rest,
In nothing, but can never rest.
He lay most strangely there at rest.
Of silence he had lain at rest
Or by the fiureplace set at rest.
But then, it puts me to the test.
I found you good, and I attest 
Gravely departed priest and guest.
Caricaturing every guest.
A place is found for every guest
For trousers^ dress-coat^ and for vest;
He set his mind to work with zest.
I tasted all your joys with zest;
One whose embittered mind finds zest
His courting now was minus zest;
Could scarce inspire young Lensky’s zest.
Each long and narrow as your waist,
About: a noisy laughing host . . . 
Between two aunts, beside a post,
Decked out as for a holocaust . . .
Stanza L, Line 12. The reference is to August
In time-worn halls and those that just
Had been refurbished, yawn he must.
Alas! by God’s strange will we must 
But from the ones we love and trust,
I try to glimpse it; but I trust 
In fancying a happy tryst 
Stanza XX FJ, Line 4. Count Emmanuel St.
The storm and strife, the frequent feast; 
The ball had pierced clean through the breast.
What languor fills her lovely breast!
What anguished longing held me fast!
Well, must you go now? Not so fast!
Where, on a rustic bench at last
When shall I meet the girl at last
Wine of the Don, to drink a toast.
We’ll go together , . . Oh, my chest! . . .
Your wicked pencils, oh, St. Priest!
Who, lulling reason, comes to rest
Thus, for an evening game of whist,
You dwell in dreams, and you persist 
Stanza XXX F///, Line 12. Idol mio: the first
The editor has followed closely the text of the first
This way is of all fates the worst.
Upon the patriarchal dust,
The law of Fate is ever just.
To face our foes as all men must,
Racine or Virgil, Walter Scott,
It seemed so, but . . .
Then he suggests they sit one out.
courier, he drove so fast that his sword, sticking out 
The crowd of house-sprites, blowing out 
Set huckleberry syrup out.
Or on the garden gazes out . . .
The baker’s wicket opens out,
worthy man, who, as B. M. Fyedorov points out, 
Stanza XXXFII. The Petrovsky Palace, just out-
Dear reader, what you are about-
The saucers of preserve about.
There’s gloom and darkness all about;
To Olga. First they spin about.
But like a shadow moves about,
was in advance of his age; nowadays, throughout 
The shutters open; chimneys spout;
The lights, bewildering the rout;
Are charming, friends, but I would put
A clumsy goose, and thinks to put 
With jealousy revive it next.
Onegin turned to Lensky next:
Should I not give the letter’s text 
Here’s Petushkov, a rural beau;
but subtle praise of our fair compatriots. Thus Boileau, 
He read at will: Gibbon, Rousseau,
In Richardson as in Rousseau.
mar: characters in La Nouvelle Heloise, by Rousseau.
Stanza XVI, Line 5. Talon: a well-known restau-
Stanza XXXIII, Line 5. Ivan Dmitriyev: a fabu-
Regards. But Olga, oh, my friend, \ ou 
She’s wearing raspberry.” "Yes, you
If you have any mind to flirt, you
The family is well; they send you
By the Neva it may be you
My goddesses! How shall I trace you?
The country, and its dulness, bore you;
Go with the solemn folk who bore you.
It’s maddening to see before you
Proud worldlings, but to pleasure you,
"Agreed.” "Now that is good of you!”
All candor and all grace in you.
My thoughts in exile turned to you,
I bow and cede my rights to you . . .
As, my Onegin, I drop you.
But now, enough, have done; for you
But have a warm, frank welcome for you.
More than a brother’s love for you.
Portraying happy love for you;
And longing thus, be forced to meet you
And with a cheerful eye to greet you ! —
"I must confess, though loth to hurt you,
Their endlessly protracted caU.
Where you were born, or, as a beau.
Yet bidding the poor girl adieu,
xix Can others ever quite replace you?
Was bold enough to challenge you —
These many years, to me, or you.
Your winter is cut out for you.
Their freezing glances framed to hurt you.
And snoring, heavy Pustyakov 
Chapter V
DMITRIYEV
Chapter IV
GRIBOYEDOV
Great by Shirinsky-Shikhmatov and Gruzintzev.
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov,
^^Into my golden chamber^ comeV^
Leading his offspring, Kharlikov;
My cousin, sleepy-eyed Buyanov,
of the Neva,” by Muravyov.
parfaitement comme ilfauV^
Stanza XXXVI, Line 8. See Note to Stanza XV,
scription of Onegin’s ^^Album,” '^a note-book of rev- 
xxxiv
The wit Triquet, late of Tambov.
The local Paris: Petushkov,
The old fat counsellor, Flyanov,
vich Pletnyov.
XXV
XXV
xxxiv
XXV
xxxiv
XXV
xliv
xxiv
xxiv
xxxiv
XXV
XXXV
And /ar niente is my law.
In solitude without a flaw,
To wash his face with careful paw,
Stuff that the Flemish school would draw.
And purr the while: Tatyana saw
Have seen such ladies, not a few
Presents to the Neva a view 
About this common rustic view;
Oh, Moscow, Moscow! I would view
Upon the floor Triquet we view 
And strolling with the throng you’ll view
Then dipped into some vile review.
Fed by his slipper or review.
The Corsair or the Wandering Jew; 
And forthwith to a ball he flew.
A tale of sentiment not new,
The unconcerned beloved anew.
Might have united them anew!
Until the flames blazed up anew
He swam this Hellespont anew,
Never shall I my soul renew . . .
She thumbed her Martin till he knew
My little book. With you I knew
That poets feel, he lacked, nor knew 
The customs that our elders knew.
And there were those who said they knew
As, sped like arrows from the bow.
Is forced to curtsey, to his bow.
Stanza XXVII, Line 4. In the original the Moscow
group of young highbrows who served in the Moscow 
She reads the sweet romance, and how
I freeze — good God! — ^recalling how
It’s time he ceased to be a show . .
But tenderness his look did show.
Or a deserved reproach will show
As every spring the sapHngs show
That one be potted anyhow,
I . . . I’m in love,” she murmured low.
They loosed my braids, and singing low
The music, he would whisper low 
The bud that just begins to blow.
A kitchen and a fence below.
His verses like a river flow.
Where old Neva’s gray waters flow,
And they delight to see it flow.
The heart once more with hope will glow.
And Tanya’s heart began to glow.
But with the living truth aglow,
He set the ladies’ eyes aglow.
With flattering pen and heart aglow.
No more the vogue, you will allow.
A proper distance to allow,
To method, he would not allow 
And I shall speak, if you allow,
What London haberdashers hallow
We buy with timber and with tallow:
And Lethe’s sluggish tide will swallow
Vlll And as of yore play the odd fellow?
Zaretzky and the honest fellow 
"Has he grown tame at last, and mellow?
The poet, and the world will follow 
Content in my old age to follow
No bard was keen as I to follow
Or must I with dull glances follow
At the gay spectacle turned hollow. 
The science of revolt was slow
With shouts and plaudits. Tanya now 
Its tale of humble lives, where now 
But that is not my pleasure now.
The plain girl’s love? Why, even now,
About her older sister now.
Are quite forgot- The path is now 
Parny’s sad tenderness is now
In its seductive figments now!
Onegin’s waiting for us now.”
Maidens, come and trip it now,
Of which I’ve lost the habit now.
'Why can’t the devil take you now?’ ”
Can it be she who only now
Of making such a choice, I know;
”0h, it is nothing, nurse, I know.
A village view she seemed to know,
You spend your time, I’d like to know?”
All one might care to be or know;
What tears I shed you do not know.
She sees a court she does not know,
Were all of them, as well you know.
Was then our ruler, as you know.
At last, by night, arrived the snow*
They gallop snorting o’er the snow.
Shed rainbow lights across the snow
All covered with the brittle snow;
And it is weighted down with snow;
And hands him linen white as snow.
From two to thirty, in a row;
Showed him so cold and calm a brow?
You sigh, and think with farrowed brow —
Then, aiming at his pallid brow.
Crowding, the trees about it grow,
Straight past the porter, like an arrow
But then he paused, and with his narrow
I might indeed make bold to borrow
And dashes off. Before the morrow
XVlll Had Tanya known that on the morrow
^'The other . . . But we’ve time tomorrow,
"The ray of dawn will shine tomorrow,
XXll When I, mayhap, past joy and sorrow.
Had he but known the wounding sorrow
Singer of feasts and tender sorrow,
Poor Lensky cannot bear his sorrow.
xlii We’ll show off Tanya. To my sorrow,
And shall return to him, I vow,
''Get up,” he cried, "Past six, I vow,
The lover’s language, the sweet vow,
She sits with downcast head, too lax
With her neat monogram in wax.
Will bravely face the stake, nor wax 
Stanza XXIX, Line 8, The original refers ex-
Appendix
And, with no aim on which to fix,
xlix
Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Having attained to twenty -six —
xix
xix
xix
xix
^xxxix
Of prudence now I drink Bordeaux.
And in her mind a billet-doux
And that for many a long day.
As upon any other day.
And steamed herself on Saturday —
And dreams and musings far from gay.
And as a child she’d romp and play
And for the pranks he liked to play
And you shall judge me as you may.
And Olenka’s. Why say them nay?”
And never said his passions nay.
A classicist in such a fray.
And whom shall we confide in, pray?
And drops. His clouded eyes betray
And he would have a deal to say . . .
And had his last farewells to say.
And jealous in a frigid way.
A prize that chanced to come his way:
And he was busy anyway.
And pleading first that by-and-by
And in a voice pohte but reedy
All children know the melody:
And fashion, or a parody?
And in high London circles, they 
”And this is my Tatyana.” 'Taney!
As I her rustic charms survey.
At once the slanderer to defy.
And what the moon might signify.
And hard and cold, and petrify 
And when a star dropped down the sky
And all exclaim delightedly
And window -sashes rattled loudly.
And guard your daughters more severely.
And chats of this and that politely;
Are lulled to sleep, and readily 
As years went by, and readily
A simple Russian family
Amidst this dreary family,
As I fared onward gloomily,
Among those regions drearily.
At the casino cosily;
And seat the two friends hastily.
And there the weary ploughmen dally.
And find, wherever she may sally
And with good cheer and merry sally
And swift to flee from fun and folly,
And in the sleigh most carefully
Are guarding fur-coats faithfully;
Although he grew more melancholy,
affected by liberal-minded fashionables in the early 
A habit, Lensky.” ^"^Oh, but clearly,
And thunderous, flock eagerly:
And raise love’s value cleverly;
And the polite world’s hurly-burly.
And had grown ashen-cold and surly;
And yet more pleasant, on the sly
And praise Odessa’s gardens greatly.
(A shrewd command that perfectly 
All wonder whether they see rightly;
And brooklets murmured pleasantly, 
And Lensky, grieving honestly,
Age comes to all, my darling, duly.
And by those ashes, mourning truly,
And now what of Onegin? Truly
Another landowner come newly
And plunged in sorry thought, more slowly
All greedy boredom’s progeny.
Again a book was his sole crony —
And took his medal for a toy
are full of lively imagination and extraordinary 
Alone the shepherd, weak and hoary.
Are crammed with all that’s necessary:
A shaggy bear! At Tanya’s cry
A lexicon of snobbery
^'And what of Olga?” is her query:
A northern ball in all its glory,
Another’s, and his memory 
A gravestone tells its mournful story.
At the commencement of my story
And stares unseeing, in no hurry
And earn me fame and sound and fury.
Albani, an Italian painter of the seventeenth century, 
15 About, some idle and some busy,
And feigned the pang of jealousy,
A pleasant notoriety?
All in good time, serene and thrifty —
Are here cast off, or so the flighty 
"Ah, but the elegy is flighty.
And yet Odessa, our wet city,
And offer hospitality.
And fright but bred fidelity;
And grief changed to serenity.
An ardent faith in liberty.
An exquisite both bold and natty.
And you, my reader, wise and witty.
And for his mind, his rank does duty.
And where the youthful galaxy
A talked-of novel, rather hazy,
A monogram he found too mazy,
And with love’s sw^eet confusion dizzy,
BARATYNSKY
Blessed the new master every day.
Can only curse his wedding-day!
God grant it’s nothing! Welladay!
He must be off without delay.
He marks the hour with some dismay:
Because there was not much to pay,
Do me this favor, nurse, I pray.”
Hear my confession, then, I pray.
He will lie late, and on Ms tray 
Her voice, were such as they portray
Be thou my staffs nor let me stray.
But I’m a dunce! They bade me say
His Olga. I can hear him say:
Her spouse had not a word to say.
Here at my feet. But dare you say 
How can I help you, only say!
Hymen prepares to strew our way,
For it is late, the shortest way;
Come away, girls, come away!
Fly, my darlings, run away.
His mind was ever far away;
Caught fast, she cannot get away.
He thrust his nose in right away.
Forced me to tear my heart away;
Before they halted at a gateway 
Behind the mill they went straightway.
Disturbed by ghosts of days gone by;
Gustave de Linar: a character in Valerie, a novel by 
”Dear me, the years have just flown by!”
He might have learned that life was shabby
Had gout at forty, fat and flabby;
He walks into the empty lobby.
Disputing your small legacy.
Himself, even in privacy.
He was no fool; and Eugene, ready
From nearby hills the snow, already
Bumps down Tverskaya Street already.
He held that loyal friends and steady
Flows down in muddy streams and steady
Gleam white; the sleigh, more swift than steady. 
Girls, strike up a melody.
But now all minds are fogged and cloudy,
But lo! from out the morning valley
Beneath my Afric’s sunny sky,
He Hked debate, and sometimes rudely
By dinner, tea, and supper merely.
But here is tea: the girls demurely
Consoled the lady quite completely.
He could forget himself completely.
He let the summer season fly,
Her in the princess readily!
ducted a flirtation when he was confined to the family 
Hi Dashed off; arrived; and heartily
Her walks are longer, she will dally
His sharp intelligence and chilly,
Grew worldly-wise as life grew chilly,
His way of dreaming, willy-nilly.
Gave up his dreams as wild and silly:
He spared us, true, one piece of folly;
Begins to raise his pistol coolly.
Confound the senses suddenly.
But her good husband loved her dearly,
Hold your lorgnette up, watch them nearly.
Carry this letter secretly
His hand upon his breast lays lightly.
Beholding Lensky. ^^Well?” Forthrightly
His son was married recently.
Examine Tanya silently
He marked the time, and presently
He decorates it earnestly:
First Eugene, still advancing duly.
Come home again, young Lensky duly
Can it be that Tatyana truly
Freely the poet spoke and truly,
Hi Yet brighter shines the moon than any
But there’s no rule that has not any:
Eugene, more tolerant than many.
Games kindred in monotony.
Dufresny, 1654-1724.
He spared the rod to spoil the boy,
Both tongue and seal are pink, are dry.
Describes in pensive tracery 
He calls for help, in misery;
Blessed is he who leaves the glory 
Don’t aim to cover it with glory:
But where is my disjointed story?
But now . . . the tombstone and its story
He gives his man the arms to carry
He hoped that in good time I’d marry
Blessed is he who could be merry
But never mind, let’s rather hurry
Could scarcely count them, should I try.”
Have played a prank in coquetry.
Be sentenced by a crooked jury 
By sullen time, and soon grow wry 
By now the wine of poesy
Commands your tender minstrelsy?
By ladies in society . . .
Her countrified simplicity 
Hers is a calm simplicity.
Enjoy staid domesticity,
His soul’s innate nobility;
First let us prick his vanity
But even then, and more’s the pity,
Bucolic piece! Good Lord, have pity!
By an assumed austerity;
His appetite for pleasure’s hearty —
Here is a ball, and there a party;
Enough. Though late, I’ve done my duty,
Come warm yourself where it is cozy;” 
HOW CAN ONE NOT LOVE MOSCOW, PRAY?
In all the novels of the day.
In truth what brought you here today? 
Ignores what happened yesterday,
In your imported carriage, pray
In the same carefree lively way 
I choke him with a tragedy;
”It’s like a novel . . . life’s so chancey • . .”
himself the youngest boy; he remembered how they 
In his first youth he w'as the prey
I want to cry, to sob — oh, nursey!”
I blame you . . . For you acted boldly. 
Is but a flirt. Though she is barely 
I w-ould not praise you, but sincerely
IX Upon the judgment-seat, or merely
I’ve scanned the pages most severely.
Just here and there hard labor lately
In French he could converse politely.
Here Lunin spoke impressively,
Has been diluted heavily.
IX Of many a wild fit of folly.
Is trained on her whose features dimly 
I read not to the crowd, but only
Inspired by tender melancholy,
I am assailed by melancholy;
I treasure it most piously;
I’ve drawn a likeness perfectly:
In cosy comfort, sleeping sweetly.
It was his pleasure quietly
Is weeping, weeping quietly.
In full the tender story duly,
How changed Tatyana is! How truly
head and the rank of lieutenant in the French army. 
Its love or anger, grief or joy;
If on the left she would espy
In chorus the old ladies cry:
I’ll tell no ghostly tales, or gory.
Its parti-colored pageantry.
It’s over. Having supped, the gentry 
It’s frowned on in society.
Its aim is high, its meaning mighty . .
Is launched into eternity.
I w-ould requite sincerity;
I took this peace, this liberty.
Is southern winter’s travesty;
I called Odessa dusty —
It was today I met the beauty;
K. VYAZEMSKY
/■ ■ ;|l nil 1 1 y
The couples as they whirl aw*ay,
Wind-tossed, and all too soon decay.
You are to come, and named the day.”
’May I but live to see the day!
This learned opus one fine day 
The fashion of a bygone day:
Then liking grew: they met each day
Katenin at a later day 
Poor Lensky fell . . . that luckless day.
Pushkin’s day.
The languors of a distant day.
To her vain passion day by day;
She is alone, alack-a-day!
^'So very early yesterday?”
Tatyana’s — comes next Saturday.
The rooms are thronged and hot and gay.
Where winter-long you were so gay;
Up to the steps, in coach and shay, 
Which told him that his uncle lay 
When at my mistress’ feet I lay
With dignity brings forth his lay.
Responded: "Why should we delay?”
where the fountains of the paternal home were play- 
On the streaked ice the sunbeams play;
Where the quick sunbeams on it play,
Of seething hopes and giddy play,
She looks at him in some dismay.
What sight thus fills him with dismay?
Term vulgar. To my great dismay,
Surprise, asks: ''Where’s your second, pray?”
Like leaves that in wet autumn stray. 
The hot fat cutlets; you would say 
Who will assent to all we say?
Off in the cotmtry we can say
The less we love her, sooth to say —
Poor Lensky scarce knew what to say.
XVI Broods over all he dare not say:
You knew the answer — as you say: 
To overhear what they may say.
TO ONEGIN But you^re unsociable, they say.
(Mechanically, as they say),
^’Of course not, darling, only say ...”
To go: he had no wish to stay.
Oh, horror! Better far to stay
Took punishment once in a way.
Write prose, and take the humbler way;
Monsieur was sent upon his way.
To his Tatyana makes his way.
Was our morose Tatyana’s way.
Tatyana took her silent way
Thou epic Muse! Upon my way
W'^e ... we don'll shine in any way.
Safe in the woodland, hid away.
Tatyana watched them drive away 
Onegin, also far away.
Take off, and smoothly soar away.
"What ails you?” "Nothing.” So — away.
The loads on the kibitkas sway.
So to their destination straightway
That thrilled him in the days gone by,
The people’s lore of days gone by;
They look like fenceposts, flashing by.
The horses to an oak near by.
Old women smiled as she went by;
Nor reckoned days as they went by,
The ladies’ little feet fly by.
The tom-cat calls the tabby
Looking too corpselike to be nobby.
With foreign words; their frequency 
"My child, you’re ill! The Lord have mercy!
To save his honor stood quite ready 
To make his noble coflSn ready:
The bullets are crammed down already;
The pistols gleam, held straight and steady;
To hold the pistol straight and steady;
Vlll Admired his judgment, always steady.
Monsieur FAbbe, a Frenchman, seedy,
Went forth, in dress — a London dandy.
Now my Onegin, keen as brandy.
’Mongst thinkers who are few and cloudy, 
XU We like romances not too rowdy
Zaretzky, once a jolly rowdy,
On horseback; such close friends were they 
My tuneful stanzas forth till they 
To ask Anisya for the key.
VI Through meadowland and linden alley.
Within the hill -encircled valley
To watch the swans in some dim valley 
That waters well the nearby valley.
On scenes both various and motley.
The youthful heart; I will defy
Wrote, on the spot, an elegy.
Stanzas I-V are romanticized autobiography.
The glory’s gone, I know not why;
No finer, but just finicky.
Or like, up in the silly sky.
xli And on the highway marches boldly
You came and lectured me so coldly —
The hazy dawn commences coldly.
Not now: we, like the ladies, proudly
Would start a quarrel quite as shrewdly, 
The things that I concoct in lonely
The errors are a trifle merely.
^^Well, now, Onegin. Yawning?” ^Merely
^^Then why upbraid him thus severely?
When sweetly through the doors and surely 
Or else he may, dehberately.
The bed-curtains; awake completely,
Not pain, but death. Thus, sparkling whitely
XVlll Please follow me,” she said politely.
To the inviting sea would fly.
To suffer prison, and would fly 
Out from the house the serf -boys fly,
They’ll cock the trigger and let fly,
'"^Make way! Make way!” along they fly.
To promenade, as all do daily.
There is a dinner-party daily
Meanwhile, in morning costume, gaily
xliv Her wistful languor greeted gaily
The simple talk flows readily.
To meet his fathers speedily;
Plump Pustyakov strides heavily;
XXI The fearful shadows gather thickly;
Lukerya Lvovna still paints thickly,
The quarrel grows; Onegin quickly
Lubov Petrovna lies as quickly,
When in the springtime I would dally
XXXlll To see him, baited, turn and rally.
’Tis pleasant with a wicked sally
Of Kamenka’s deep groves and hilly 
So things went on beside the chilly
She is not hurried, is not chilly,
Nor full of idle chat and silly;
Now Yule-tide brings its fun and folly.
Pranks (like love’s dream, another folly)
xlii The while her wistful spirit wholly
The young tell fortimes, all are jolly.
Now" let me speak of something jolly.
Sed alia temporal Such jolly
Must leave my hero, ruefully,
Repeatedly and almost grimly 
To scratch her neck, and stubbornly
No, silent, wild, and melancholy,
Thus Eugene thought with melancholy.
Sits home, awaiting the reply;
The creature bellows in reply 
We both had played with passion, early
The will to rule is seen thus early:
XXXVlii A poet — this were paying dearly
Thus sunk in reveries, he nearly
Your frank avow-al touched me nearly.
XXXIV And never looked at her too nearly —
The tea. I note the hour, or nearly,
Out of her swaddling-clothes, she’s fairly 
Well, take it, since you are so sly!).
'^'^Tell me your dream,” all breathlessly
Points out my portrait unctuously.
The letters that he wrote so neatly,
Kind habit soothed her sorrow sweetly.
The golden bubbles rising lightly
^^With the late Lensky almost nightly
Like Hippocrene it sparkles brightly.
No partner ever was so sprightly.
Onegin grips his pistol tightly,
No, to he with you constantly;
Of heirs is heard, indecently 
Oh, I have erred sufficiently
Lest, sick of pleasure, momently
Shall I be thirty presently?
The city breathes of Europe; hotly.
She falls into the snow; alertly
XV And in his arms she lies inertly,
XX Quite tete-a-tete he’d lectured duly
Tutored by her own wit — she duly 
xliii All his concerns recounting duly.
VI Was also picked to pieces duly,
XXXVi His daily occupations duly
^Tfow dull-witted you are, nurse, truly!”
Not now. I love my hero truly.
^'The manor-house,” says Tanya, shyly,
XVll At once the children run off spryly
The smart coquettes’ smart enemy,
The stars of night are fair and many,
Like Delwig drunk in company.
So be it! Now my destiny
The marker on the balcony
The same consuming agony.
Or paint the villain’s agony;
With the avow'als of a boy.
When I was but a tiny boy!
Thought sermons fashioned to annoy;
”Was all her life thereafter dreary?
What, in the country, when it’s dreary.
xliii This is the season eyes grow weary.
Whose peasants live in beggary;
The three kibitkas customary
That year was extraordinary.
Would make the den her library.
Upon the third of January,
Or after dinner I may vary
The boredom: nabbing the unwary
The stranger. At her frightened cry,
original the husband shouts, "fora!”, the Italian cry 
Of speech, and earn the mockery 
Our marriage w-ould mean misery.
The jesting mixed with flattery . . .
Until a great discovery
Who early found both death and glory.
Living the chapters through, she’d glory
You witness of that fallen glory.
Nikita, restless, keen for glory,
One line, held in the memory.
You still retain the memory 
Renowned for trenchant oratory.
She found in a romantic story
tXXVlll On with the journey and the story!
Nor read the ending of the story.
Will be the subject of my story.
When we were young, we did not tarry.’ ”
The sledge awaits. He does not tarry:
X Who ripened, like good port or sherry,
Onegin sleeps and does not worry.
Whither Onegin in a flurry
To join the hateful worldly flurry.
The sun appears, a brief snow-flurry
Whose days are living poetry —
She has no trace of coquetry —
’Twixt the maid’s attic and the entry. 
twenties of the century.
novel by Louvet de Couvrai, an eighteenth-century 
Which he declaims with ecstasy
Then muttered on in ecstasy.
You, dreams of sacred poesy?
One window glimmers bright and rosy.
What of it? Though his eyes were busy,
The exile from society
’Twould give you in society 
Once more forsakes society.
Quite free of all his debts at fifty.
Nor yet the cuckold, stout and haughty.
The married rakes, no longer naughty.
refuge from the fires that were ravaging the city.
” You ’ll have to take her to the city —
To gossip to about the city
V Desert at last the restless city
Of innocent felicity.
Your dreams, your high simplicity.
Old-fashioned hospitality.
Shows passion’s volatility?
”Not on my income, more’s the pity!”
Wants one thing further, more’s the pity;
When at my tasks of charity.
Killed by familiarity;
That only mediocrity 
Proves rustic ingenuity!).
Onegin, wiseacres aplenty
Pronounced most learned, though not yet twenty.
Their marriage was a certainty.
The beefsteak and the Strasbourg patty 
Where I can . . .” "Ah, another pretty
Performing, lit the girl’s pale beauty,
My labors — bless them with thy beauty^
Meanwhile, the moon her silver duty
Verse full of amatory foUy,
The square grows lively now and dizzy
With whirling thoughts his soul grew dizzy,
ZHUKOVSKY
====================================================================

Original:
Not with a notion of delighting 
Proud worldlings, but to pleasure you,
For friendship’s sake would I were writing
A nobler page, more fine and true,
Worthy of him I am addressing,
Whose days are living poetry —
Affection’s pledge, indeed, expressing
Your dreams, your high simplicity.
No matter— ah, but look with favor
Upon the chapters in your hand, 
Half-grave, half-gay, and with a flavor 
Of what is common, what is grand;
To this were fribbling hours devoted,
Late nights, yes, and a facile art;
Fruit of spoiled years, or green and tart,
The mind’s reflections coldly noted,
Chapter One
MAKES HASTE TO LIVE AND CANNOT WAIT TO FEEL.
K. VYAZEMSKY
uncle always was respected;
But his grave illness, I confess,
Is more than could have been expected:
A stroke of genius, nothing less.
He offers all a grand example;
But, God, such boredom who would sample? —
Daylong, nightlong, thus to be bid 
To sit beside an invalid!
Low cunning must assist devotion
To one who is but half-alive:
You smooth his pillow and contrive
Amusement while you mix his potion;
You sigh, and think with farrowed brow —
'Why can’t the devil take you now?’ ”
’Tis thus the gay dog’s thoughts are freighted,
As through the dust his horses fare.
Who by the high gods’ will is fated
To be his relative’s sole heir.
You knew Ruslan and fair Ludmila;
For this new hero prithee feel a
Like fellowship, as I regale 
You, readers, with another tale:
Onegin, meet him, born and nourished
Where old Neva’s gray waters flow,
Where you were born, or, as a beau.
It may be, in your glory flourished.
I moved there also for a while,
But find the North is not my style.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
A man of rank, his worthy father
Would always give three balls a year;
III He lived in debt, and did not bother
To keep his hopeless ledgers clear.
Fate guarded Eugene, our young waster;
While in due time Monsieur replaced her,
At first Madame controlled the child;
The charming lad was rather wild.
Monsieur FAbbe, a Frenchman, seedy,
Thought sermons fashioned to annoy;
He spared the rod to spoil the boy,
And in a voice pohte but reedy
Would chide him, would forgive him soon.
And walk him in the afternoon.
When Eugene reached the restless season
Of seething hopes and giddy play,
IV And melancholy minus reason.
Monsieur was sent upon his way.
Now my Onegin, keen as brandy.
Went forth, in dress — a London dandy.
His hair cut in the latest mode;
He dined, he danced, he fenced, he rode.
In French he could converse politely.
As well as write; and how he bowed!
In the mazurka, ’twas allowed.
No partner ever was so sprightly.
What more is asked? The world is warm
In praise of so much wit and charm.
Since but a random education
Is all they give us as a rule,
V With us, to miss a reputation
For learning takes an utter fool.
Onegin, wiseacres aplenty
Pronounced most learned, though not yet twenty.
And some harsh judges found, forsooth,
A very pedant in the youth.
A gifted talker, he would chatter
With easy grace of this and that.
But silent as a sage he sat
When they discussed some weighty matter,
And with the spark of a bon mot
He set the ladies’ eyes aglow.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Since Latin’s held not worth attention,
His knowledge of the tongue was slight:
VI Of Juvenal he could make mention.
Decipher epigraphs at sight.
Quote Virgil, not a long selection.
And always needing some correction,
Aind in a letter to a j&riend
Place a proud vale at the end.
He had no itch to dig for glories
Deep in the dust that time has laid.
He let the classic laurel fade,
But knew the most amusing stories
That have come down the years to us 
Since the dead days of Romulus.
The lofty passion, the pure pleasure
That poets feel, he lacked, nor knew 
Vli Trochaic from iambic measure,
In spite of all oinr efforts, too.
Theocritus and Homer bored him ;
If true delight you would afford him
You’d give him Adam Smith to read.
A deep economist, indeed,
He talked about the wealth of nations;
The state relied, his friends were told. 
Upon its staples, not on gold —
This subject filled his conversations.
His father listened, frowned, and groaned.
And mortgaged all the land he owned.
All Eugene knew is past relating.
But for one thing he had a bent,
Vlll And I am not exaggerating
His principal accomplishment;
From early youth his dedication
Was to a single occupation;
He knew one torment, one delight
Through empty day and idle night:
The science of the tender passion
That Ovid sang, that brought him here, 
And closed his turbulent career 
In such a brief and tragic fashion —
Ovid, who found, so far from Rome,
[ix] In these lone steppes an exile’s home.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
He early played the fond deceiver.
And feigned the pang of jealousy,
X Rejoiced the fair one but to grieve her,
Seemed sunk in gloom, or bold and free.
Would turn quite taciturn with languor, 
Then flash with pride and flame with anger, 
Show rapture or indifference,
Or burn with sudden eloquence!
The letters that he wrote so neatly,
So easily, with passion seethed;
One thing alone he loved, he breathed;
He could forget himself completely.
His eyes, how tender, quick and clear.
Or shining with the summoned tear!
He knew the ruses that would brighten
The eyes of the ingenuous young;
XI He could pretend despair, to frighten.
Or sweetly use the flatterer’s tongue;
He’d catch the moment of emotion.
And out of an old-fashioned notion
The strait-laced innocent beguile 
With skill and passion, touch and smile.
He would implore the shy confession.
Catch the first stirrings of the heart.
Secure a tryst with tender art,
And at the following sweet session
Would, tete-a-tete, where no one heard. 
Instruct the fair without a word.
’Twas early he learned how to flutter
The heart of the confirmed coquette!
What biting words the rogue would utter
Of those he wished her to forget!
None was so quick as he at trapping
A rival, or to catch him napping.
You men who lived in wedded bliss
Remained his friends, I grant you this.
The married rakes, no longer naughty.
Would show him every friendliness; 
Suspicious age could do no less,
Nor yet the cuckold, stout and haughty.
Whose satisfactions were, through life, 
Himself, his dinner, and his wife.
[xiii
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
After an evening’s dissipations
He will lie late, and on Ms tray 
XV Find notes piled Mgh. What? Invitations?
Three ladies mention a soiree.
Here is a ball, and there a party;
His appetite for pleasure’s hearty —
Where will my naughty lad repair?
For he is welcome everywhere.
Meanwhile, in morning costume, gaily
Donning Ms wide-br imm ed Bolivar,
He joins the throng on the boulevard^
To promenade, as all do daily.
Until Breguet’s unsleeping chime
Announces it is dinner-time.
At dusk a sleigh’s the thing, and caMng:
'"^Make way! Make way!” along they fly.
XVi Upon Ms beaver collar falling.
Like silver dust the snowflakes lie.
Talon’s Ms goal, no hesitating:
His friend [Kaverin] must be waiting.
He comes: a cork pops, up it goes.
The vintage of the comet flows.
A bleeding roastbeef’s on the table.
And truffles, luxury of youth,
French dishes for the gourmet’s tooth.
And Strasbourg pies, imperishable;
Here’s every dainty that you please:
Gold pines, and live Limburger cheese.
Glass after glass is drained in drenching
The hot fat cutlets; you would say 
XVii They’ve raised a thirst there is no quenching.
But now it’s time for the ballet.
The theatre’s wicked legislator.
Who tmto every fascinator
In turn Ms fickle flattery brings.
And boasts the freedom of the wings,
Onegin flies to taste the blisses
And breathe the free air of the stage,
To praise the dancer now the rage,
Or greet a luckless Phedre with Msses,
Or caU the actress he preferred
Just for the sake of being heard.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Oh, land of boundless fascination!
There bold Fonvizin, freedom’s friend,
xvill Sped shafts of satire at the nation,
Knyazhnin played ape there without end,
Semyonova there wrought her magic 
With Ozerov’s grave lines and tragic. 
Katenin at a later day 
Revived the grandeur of Corneille;
There Shakovskoy brought noisy laughter
With his sardonic comedies;
Didelot enjoyed his victories
Upon those very boards thereafter.
Where, in the shadow of the wings.
My youth fled by, remembrance clings.
My goddesses! How shall I trace you?
I sadly call on each sweet name.
xix Can others ever quite replace you?
And you, can you remain the same?
Oh, once again will you be singing
For me? Shall I yet see you winging 
Your way in soulful flight and free.
My fair Russian Terpsichore?
Or must I with dull glances follow
Strange faces mid the painted set.
And having stared through my lorgnette
At the gay spectacle turned hollow. 
Observe it with a yawn at last,
And silently recall the past?
The theatre’s full, the boxes glitter,
The stalls are seething, the pit roars,
XX The gallery claps and stamps, atwitter;
The curtain rustles as it soars;
A fairy light about her playing,
The magic of the bow obeying,
A crowd of nymphs around her — lo!
Istomina on lifted toe.
One foot upon the floor is planted.
The other slowly circles, thus,
Then wafted as by Eolus
She flies, a thing of down, enchanted;
Now serpentine she twists and wheels,
And now she leaps and claps her heels.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
The house rocks with applause; undaunted,
And treading toes, between the chairs 
XXI Onegin presses; with his vaunted
Aplomb, he lifts his eye-glass, stares
Askance at fair, unwonted faces,
Remarks the jew^els and the laces,
And notes complexions, with a sneer
Briefly surveying every tier.
He hows to sundry friends; his mocking
Slow eyes come last to rest upon 
The lighted stage, and with a yawn 
He sighs: ^'They’re past the age — it’s shocking! 
I’ve haunted the ballet — what for?
Even Didelot becomes a bore.”
The imps and cupids, quick as monkeys,
Upon the boards still flutter free,
XXll While in the lobby sleepy flunkeys
Are guarding fur-coats faithfully;
Within, you hear the feet still pounding.
The coughs, the shouts and hisses sounding.
The noses blown, and without pause.
Above it all, the wild applause.
The carriage horses, chilled with waiting.
Impatient, twitch beneath the lamp.
The coachmen round the bonfires tramp.
Their masters wearily berating.
But our Onegin’s out of range
Of curses: he’s gone home to change.
Shall I depict less with a prudent
Than with a quite impartial pen 
XXlll The cabinet where fashion’s student
Is dressed, undressed, and dressed again?
What London haberdashers hallow
We buy with timber and with tallow:
’Tis here, to please a lavish whim,
With all a dandy’s mind can limn.
And all that Paris in her passion
For the most costly merchandise 
So elegantly can devise 
To tempt the sporting man of fashion.
Observe his closet well, and gage
Thereby our eighteen-year -old sage.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Here’s bronze and china in profusion.
And Turkish pipes of amber rare,
Xxiv And, for the senses’ sweet confusion,
Perfumes in crystal cut with care;
Steel files and combs of various guises,
And brushes, thirty shapes and sizes.
That teeth and nails may both be served.
Are here, with scissors straight and curved. 
Rousseau (forgive me if I chatter)
Could not conceive how pompous Grimm
Dared clean his nails in front of him —
The lofty madcap! — but no matter:
In this case it is not too strong
To call that friend of freedom wrong.
A man of sense, I am conceding,
May pay attention to his nails;
XXV Why should one quarrel with good breeding?
With most folk, custom’s rule prevails.
My Eugene was [Chadayev] second:
With every jealous word he reckoned,
No rung would suit him but the top —
In dress a pedant and a fop.
To prink and preen he’d ask no urging,
But spend three hours before the glass,
Till from his dressing-room he’d pass.
Like Venus’ very self emerging.
Should giddy deity desire
To masquerade in male attire.
Now having given due attention
To a toilette you must admire,
XXVI The learned world would have me mention
Each detail of our friend’s attire.
One takes a risk in such discussion,
Because there are no words in Russian
For trousers^ dress-coat^ and for vest;
But then, it puts me to the test.
For as it is, my style is peppered
With foreign words; their frequency 
I trust that you will pardon me;
With French it’s spotted like a leopard —
Although I’ve glanced at, in times gone,
The Academic lexicon.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
xxviii
But never mind, let’s rather hurry
Off to the ball as is required,
Whither Onegin in a flurry
Is dashing in the cab he hired.
Along dark streets wrapped deep in slumber
Gay carriages, a goodly number,
Shed rainbow lights across the snow
From their twin lanterns as they go.
With lampions bright on sills and ledges
The splendid mansion shines and gleams, 
And silhouetted by the beams,
Across the pane a shadow edges:
The profile that a move will blur
Of lovely lady, modish sir.
Straight past the porter, like an arrow
Our hero took the marble stair,
But then he paused, and with his narrow
White hand he swiftly smoothed his hair, 
And entered. Here the throng is trooping; 
The orchestra’s already drooping;
A gay mazurka holds the crowd;
The press is thick, the hubbub loud.
The Horse Guard’s spurs clank as he dances;
And hand meets hand, and hearts beat high; 
The ladies’ little feet fly by.
Pursued in flight by flaming glances;
While wildly aU the fiddles sing
To drown the jealous whispering.
When I knew ardor and elation.
On balls I also used to dote:
There one can make a declaration,
And cleverly convey a note.
Husbands esteemed, to you I tender —
Your honor’s most astute defender —
My services in time of need:
My earnest counsels prithee heed.
And guard your daughters more severely.
You mothers, as your own once did.
Or else — or else — , else God forbid!
Hold your lorgnette up, watch them nearly.
These warnings in your ears are dinned 
Because it’s long since I have sinned.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter One
xxxi
Obeying folly’s least suggestion,
How much of life I spent in vain.
And yet, were morals not in question,
I’d live through every ball again.
I love fierce youth, my private passion
Is the shrewd elegance of fashion,
The crowd whose sparkle nothing dims,
The little feet and lovely limbs;
Search Russia through, you’ll scarce discover
Three pairs of truly pretty feet.
Ah, once how fast my heart would beat
When two feet tripped toward their lover! 
I’m sad and cold, and yet it seems 
They still can thrill me in my dreams.
When will you lose remembrance of them?
Where go, you madman, to forget?
Ah, little feet, how I did love them!
Now on what flowers are they set?
In Orient luxury once cherished.
The trace you left has long since perished
From Northern snows: you loved to tread 
Upon voluptuous rugs instead.
It was for you that I neglected
The call of fame, for you forgot 
My country, and an exile’s lot —
All thoughts, but those of you, rejected.
Brief as your footprints on the grass.
The happiness of youth must pass.
Diana’s breast, the face of Flora,
Are charming, friends, but I would put
Them both aside and only for a 
Glimpse of Terpsichore’s sweet foot. 
Prophetic of a priceless pleasure,
A clue to joys beyond all measure.
Its classic grace draws in its wake
Desires that are too keen to slake.
Where’er it goes, I am its lover:
When on the grass in Spring it’s pressed,
Or by the fiureplace set at rest.
At table, ’neath the damask cover.
Crossing the ballroom’s polished floor.
Or climbing down the rocky shore.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
xxxiv
Well I remember waves in riot
Before a storm; I wanted, too,
Thus to rush forth, then lapse in quiet
There at her feet, as they would do.
The billows covered them with kisses,
My lips were envious of their blisses!
No, when with youth and love on fire,
I did not ache with such desire
To brush the shy lips of a maiden 
Or touch to flame a rosy cheek,
Or with such urgent ardor seek
To kiss the breast with languor laden;
No, passion never wrought for me
The same consuming agony.
With sighs I think, bemused adorer,
Aghast at time’s swift slipping sands.
How once I held her stirrup for her,
And caught that foot in these two hands;
Again imagination’s kindled.
The heart that thought its fires had dwindled
Flames up, the embers glow again 
With sudden passion, sudden pain . . .
But in their praises why be stringing
Anew the garrulous fond lyre?
The haughty creatures may inspire
Our songs, but are not worth the singing. 
Their looks enchant, their words are sweet, 
And quite as faithless as their feet.
And what of my Onegin? Drowsing,
He’s driven from the ball to bed:
The drum is heard, the city’s rousing,
For Petersburg’s no sleepyhead.
The peddler plods, the merchant dresses,
While into town the milkmaid presses, 
Bearing her jar o’er creaking snows;
And to his stand the cabby goes.
The cheerful morning sounds awaken;
The shutters open; chimneys spout;
The baker’s wicket opens out,
A loaf is proffered, coins are taken,
A white cap shows, all in a trice:
The baker’s German and precise.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
xxxvii
:xxviii
^xxxix
xli]
The ball’s wild gaiety was wearing.
So turning morning into night,
To darkness’ kind abode repairing,
Now sleeps the scion of delight.
By afternoon he will be waking.
He’ll then resume till day is breaking
The merry and monotonous round.
And then once more till noon sleep sound.
But was true joy to Eugene granted 
Then, in the flower of his youth?
Was pleasure happiness in sooth
’Mid all the conquests that he vaunted? 
When in the banquet-hall he beamed 
Was he the carefree soul he seemed?
No, soon the world began to bore him.
The senses soon grew blunt and dull.
In vain the belles might clamor for him.
He found the fairest faces null;
Seduction ceased to be amusing,
And friendship’s claims he was refusing.
Because he could make no bon mot.
Could not wash down with Veuve Cliquot
The beefsteak and the Strasbourg patty 
When his poor head began to ache;
And though he was an ardent rake,
An exquisite both bold and natty.
The time came when he quite abhorred
Even the pistol and the sword.
But there’s no need that I dissemble
His illness — ^name it how you choose,
The English spleen it may resemble,
’Twas in a word the Russian blues.
He spared us, true, one piece of folly;
Although he grew more melancholy,
Was bored with everything he tried,
He did stop short of suicide.
Soft glance, nor welcome sweetly caroled.
Nor cards, nor gossip, chased his gloom; 
He’d stroll into the drawing-room 
Surly and languid as Childe Harold.
A wanton sigh was not worth mention:
Nothing attracted his attention.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
He first abandoned you, capricious
Great ladies, of whom he’d been fond; 
xlii Indeed, today there is a vicious
Ennui pervading the haul monde.
Perhaps some lady may find matter 
In Say and Bentham for her chatter. 
But the discussions I have heard, 
Though innocent, are quite absurd.
If you have any mind to flirt, you
Are turned by one cool glance to ice,
So pious are they, so precise.
And so inflexible their virtue.
They are so clever, so serene.
The sight of them produces spleen.
You also, youthful belles, belated
O’er Petersburg’s dark pavements borne 
xliii In dashing cabs, you too were fated
To learn my Eugene’s air of scorn.
To stormy gaiety a traitor,
Onegin now decides he’ll cater
To an ambitious author’s whims:
His door he locks, his lamp he trims.
He yawns, for serious labor tries him.
His page is empty as can be.
The pen makes mock of such as he.
And so the bumptious guild denies him;
And I can’t say the clique is wrong 
To which, God help me, I belong.
At length our hollow-hearted hero
A worthy course of action finds: 
xliv The sum of all his thoughts is zero,
And so he’ll rifle keener minds;
A shelf of books he’s been perusing.
But who does that is only choosing
Between a rascal and a bore;
He’s read and read, and pray, what for?
Old fogies all, chained to tradition,
The newcomers but ape the old;
Behind the curtain’s funeral fold
He soon consigns them to perdition. 
He’s done with women, and it looks 
As though he’s surely done with books.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
The beau monde*s burdensome conventions
I too had dropped, and found him then — 
xlv As bored as I with vain inventions —
The most congenial of men.
His way of dreaming, willy-nilly.
His sharp intelligence and chilly,
I liked, and his peculiar pose;
I was embittered, he morose.
We both had played with passion, early
We both had wearied of the game;
The hearts of both now spurned the flame
And had grown ashen-cold and surly;
And both, though young, could but await
Men’s malice and the stroke of Fate.
One who has lived and thought, grows scornful.
Disdain sits silent in his eye; 
xlvi One who has felt, is often mournful.
Disturbed by ghosts of days gone by;
He can no longer be enchanted,
No respite to his heart is granted —
Remembering the past, perforce 
He is the victim of remorse.
All this lends charm to conversation.
And though the talk of my yotmg friend
At first disturbed me, in the end 
I listened, not without elation.
To his sharp judgments, sullen wit.
And epigrams that scored a hit.
Of quiet summer nights, how often,
When with diaphanous pale light
xlvii O’er the Neva the sky woidd soften
And the smooth waters, mirror-bright,
Would fail to show Diana gleaming,
We yielded to delicious dreaming.
Recalling in the soft sweet air
Many a distant love-affair —
The pleasures relished, triumphs thwarted;
Like prisoners released in sleep
To roam the forests, green and deep.
We were in reverie transported.
And carried to that region where
All life before us still lay fair.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
xlix
Onegin leaned above the river
Upon the granite parapet.
As did the bard — yet not aquiver
With ecstasy, but with regret.
Here one heard naught but echoes, dying,
From distant streets where cabs were flying, 
And sentinel to sentinel 
Sounding the cry that all was well;
Alone a lazy boatman lifted
His oars above the drowsy stream;
A horn rang out, as in a dream;
A song across the waters drifted;
But Tasso’s murmured octaves are,
By night, in dalliance, sweeter far.
Oh, waters of the Adriatic!
Oh, Brenta! I shall yet rejoice
When once again, inspired, ecstatic,
I hear the magic of your voice,
Sacred to scions of Apollo!
No bard was keen as I to follow
The strains of Albion’s proud lyre 
Extolling you in tones of fire!
Once free, and night will find me gloating
Upon a fair Venetian face,
Within the gondola’s embrace
In golden languor vaguely floating;
And she will learn my knowledge of
The tongue of Petrarch and of love.
’Tis time to loose me from my tether;
I call on freedom — ^naught avails:
I pace the beach, await good weather.
And beckon to the passing sails.
When, wrapped in storm, shall I be battling
The billows, while the shrouds are rattling, 
And roam the sea’s expanse, unpent.
Quit of the shore’s dull element?
’Tis time to seek the southern surges
Beneath my Afric’s sunny sky,
And, there at home, for Russia sigh.
Lamenting in new songs and dirges 
The land that knew my love, my pain, 
Where long my buried heart has lain.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
The pair of us had planned to wander,
On foreign scenes to feast our eyes;
li But I am here and he is yonder:
Fate had arranged it otherwise.
Upon the death of his dear father
The creditors began to gather,
And Eugene, when he saw these sirs —
Each man must do as he prefers —
Because he hated litigation
Surrendered his inheritance;
He thought it no great loss — perchance
He had some other expectation?
Had Eugene, from a little bird.
Of his old uncle’s illness heard?
Indeed, he soon received a letter
Which told him that his uncle lay 
Hi Too ill for hopes of getting better,
And had his last farewells to say.
Eugene perused the sad epistle;
Thoughts of the future made him whistle;
He caught the post with eager haste,
But soon was yawning while he raced:
He knew the task would sorely try him
For (as I’ve said) there he must sit 
And fawn and play the hypocrite.
But when he comes they notify him
His uncle’s in his cofl&n laid:
His debt to nature has been paid.
The servants gave him all assistance,
The house hummed like a hive of bees
liii With friends and foes come from a distance
Just to enjoy the obsequies.
The dead man buried, they were able
To do full justice to the table,
And, feeling they had done their best,
Gravely departed priest and guest.
Here was Onegin, then, possessing
His stables, forests, streams and land.
He who could never understand
An ordered way of life, confessing 
His early years were all a waste.
And this routine was to his taste.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Two days he found it quite diverting:
The meadows’ solitary look,
lit) The shady thickets’ cool, begirting
The purling of a gentle brook;
The third day interest abated
And he was not the least elated 
By grove and stream and field and steep — 
They only sent him off to sleep.
For though the country boasts no palace,
No card-game, poetry, or ball.
Its pleasures, like the city’s, pall.
He noted with accustomed malice.
A shadow, or a wife, pursues
As he was followed by the blues.
I like a life of country quiet;
There may the lyre sound clear and free,
Iv There fancies bloom and dreams run riot —
It suits my Muse as it suits me.
At peace, it is my artless pleasure
To wander by the lake at leisure,
In solitude without a flaw,
And /ar niente is my law.
Each morning I awake proposing
Another day without an aim;
I have no care for flighty fame;
I hardly read, I’m often dozing.
Was it not thus I long since spent
My youth in slothful sweet content?
To love and idleness devoted.
To flowery field and village sport,
Ivi With pleasure I have often noted
That I am not Onegin’s sort;
Let no sly reader be so daring —
Onegin’s traits with mine comparing —
And no calumnious friend so pert
As some time later to assert
That here, for all the world to know it,
I’ve drawn a likeness perfectly:
A portrait of none else but me,
Like Byron, pride’s consummate poet;
As though there were a tacit ban
On writing of another man.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
Poets, it is my observation,
Indulge in lovers’ dreams with ease;
Ivii I too made it my occupation
To play with tender reveries.
First, memory would trace the features,
In secret, of dear distant creatures.
And the rare magic of the Muse
The breath of life would then infuse.
The mountain maid, untamed, inspiring,
The prisoned girls of the Salgir,
’Twas thus I sang them — both were dear.
Now my companions are inquiring:
'Tn all the jealous crowd, what she
Commands your tender minstrelsy?
^'Whose glances, quickening emotion.
Caressingly repaid your song?
Iviii To whom did your confessed devotion.
To whom your pensive verse belong?”
To no one, friends, you must believe me:
I loved, and nothing could relieve me. 
That man alone knows blessedness 
Who is inspired in his distress:
For thus he brings his passion’s fuel
To poetry’s exalted flame;
And when consoled by art — and fame,
Like Petrarch, he finds love less cruel. 
But, feeling the blind archer’s sting,
I was a dolt and could not sing.
The Muse has come, and love departed,
The darkened mind is clear again; 
llX And as of old I mix, free-hearted.
Feeling and thought with music’s strain.
I write, and longing is diminished;
Beside the stanza all unfinished
No more the casual pen is led 
To sketch a woman’s legs or head.
Cold ashes hide no smoldering ember;
I have no tears, in spite of grief;
The storms which shook it like a leaf
Soon, soon my soul will not remember: 
Then what a poem I’ll contrive 
In cantos numbering twenty -five!
Eugene Onegin: Chapter One
The plan I had no pains to settle,
The hero’s named, the work’s begun;
lx My novel finds me in good fettle
And I’ve completed Chapter One.
I’ve scanned the pages most severely.
The errors are a trifle merely.
And those I do not greatly me;
I’ll give the censorship its due.
Let critics wreak their indignation
Upon the finished product then;
Neva, oh, offspring of my pen.
Shall greet you. Go, my dear creation:
Be sentenced by a crooked jury 
And earn me fame and sound and fury.
Chapter Two
0 Rus!
HORACE
The village, where Onegin’s leisure
But left him bored to a degree,
Would ravish one who prized the treasure
Of innocent felicity.
The mansion, hy a hill well hidden,
Where winds and tempests were forbidden,
And near a stream, stood calm and proud, 
Surveying fallow land and plowed.
Beyond, the plain, with hamlets dotted,
And chequered brown and gold and green, 
A halcyon bucolic scene,
With roaming flocks was lightly spotted;
While in the garden’s lavish shade 
The contemplative dryads played.
The mansion j&rom its firm foundation
Up to its roof was past all praise. 
Expressing the discrimination,
The noble taste of bygone days.
The stove with colored tiles, appealing
If out of date, the lofty ceiling.
Ancestral portraits in the gloom
And damask of the drawing-room —
All this is now outworn and faded,
The glory’s gone, I know not why;
But the sad ruin brought no sigh
From Eugene: he was far too jaded —
In time-worn halls and those that just
Had been refurbished, yawn he must.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
The room where the old man berated
His housekeeper for forty years,
III Killed flies, and snugly rusticated.
Is now our hero’s, it appears.
The furnishings are plain and stable.
The floor is oak; two chests, a table,
A down-stuffed couch are all, I think.
And nowhere is a spot of ink.
Onegin searched the cupboards, finding
Liqueurs, a ledger, applejack,
And tucked away, an almanac
For 1808 without a binding:
The old man had no time to look
Into a more exacting book.
Alone among his new possessions,
At first Eugene began to dream
IV Of making certain grand concessions
And setting up a new regime;
For the corvee he substituted
Light quit-rent, and the slave, well suited
Because there was not much to pay,
Blessed the new master every day.
Not so his calculating neighbor
Who thought our Eugene was a gull;
Another neighbor tapped his skull:
Why thus dispense with lawful labor?
The youth was called on every hand
A faddist and a firebrand.
The neighbors promptly called and twaddled
Of this and that, to his distress;
V Hence oft he had his stallion saddled
At the back porch in readiness,
That he, when wheels were within hearing,
Might dash away as they were nearing.
The gentry all cried out in scorn,
This insult was not to be borne.
’’Onegin is a boor, a mason;
He leaves the ladies’ hands unkissed;
Drinks wine from tumblers,” it was hissed;
’’He never puts a civil face on.
Says ’yes’ and ’no,’ but never ’sir.’ ”
In this opinion all concur.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Another landowner come newly
To his estate about this time 
VI Was also picked to pieces duly,
For gossip is not held a crime.
Vladimir Lensky, handsome, youthful,
A Kantian, unspoiled and truthful,
Whose soul was shaped in Gottingen, 
And w^ho could wield the poet’s pen. 
From misty Germany, Vladimir 
Had brought the fruits of learning’s tree: 
An ardent faith in liberty.
The spirit of an oddish dreamer.
Rapt eloquence in speech and song.
And curls as black as they were long.
Unspoiled by the vain show and fleeting
Of this cold world, his soul would bless 
Vll With equal warmth a comrade’s greeting
And a shy maiden’s pure caress.
His heart the nest of fond illusion,
In worldly dazzle and confusion
The hopeful youth was quick to find 
Much to enchant his virgin mind.
His doubts were never past the curing,
In reverie they would dissolve;
Life was a riddle he would solve.
He found it puzzling but alluring;
He racked his brains, and still believed
That miracles could be achieved.
A kindred soul, he held, was burning
To be united to his own,
Vlll And day by day in pensive yearning
It waited on, for him alone;
He held that loyal friends and steady
To save his honor stood quite ready 
To suffer prison, and would fly 
At once the slanderer to defy.
He held that some by Fate were chosen
:ic
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
He early knew the agitation
Of high desires and deep regret,
IX The stir of noble indignation,
Hope of a name none might forget.
He was none of your poetasters,
Goethe and Schiller were his masters.
Beneath their sky he plucked his lyre,
His spirit knew their lyric jSre.
And, fortune’s darling, in his rhyming
He paid the Muses honor due;
His sentiments were fine and true.
His music therewith sweetly c h im i ng;
His were the dreams that move the heart
And his the charm of simple art.
The theme from which he ne’er departed
Was love: he sang it late and soon,
X Serene as maidens simple-hearted.
As infant slumbers, as the moon
In the unruj63ed heavens shining;
He sang of parting and repining;
The mystic, wistful hours of night;
Of distance, promising delight;
He sang the rose, romantic flower;
And lands remote, where on the breast
Of silence he had lain at rest
And let his tears unheeded shower;
He sang life’s bloom and early blight:
His nineteenth year was scarce in sight.
Eugene alone was framed to measmre
The gifts the newcomer possessed;
XI The local gentry’s round of pleasure
Could scarce inspire young Lensky’s zest.
He fled their noisy conversation
And found their prudent talk vexation;
All kin and kennels, crops and wine;
Here not a wit was found to shine
(Not with fine words are parsnips buttered);
No syllable of sentiment.
No grace, no flash of merriment.
Lay hid in all the prose they uttered —
No savoir vivre^ no hint of verse;
And when their wives talked, it was worse.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Lensky was thought an eligible,
A 'wealthy yonth and handsome too;
Xli There was something intelligible
About this common rustic view;
The talk would turn with strange persistence
Upon the bachelor’s sad existence;
All wish to see their daughters wed
To this half-Russian, German-bred.
The samovar, that blest invention,
Is brought, and Dunya pours his tea;
And next the girl’s guitar we see;
They whisper: ^’Dimya, pay attention!”
And Dunya squeaks (would she were dumb!)
^^Into my golden chamber^ comeV^
Of course young Lensky felt no yearning
For marriage bond or marriage bell;
XIII Instead of that, our friend was burning
To know Onegin really well.
They met; except that both were human.
They were unlike as any two men:
As rock and wave, or ice and flame.
Or prose and verse — ^in naught the same.
So different, first they bored each other.
Then liking grew: they met each day
On horseback; such close friends were they 
They climg as brother clings to brother.
Thus people, frankly I confess,
Grow fond — out of sheer idleness.
Such faithful friendship as my hero’s
Is in these parlous days unknown;
XIV We think all other people zeros,
And integers: ourselves alone.
We’re all Napoleons, we’re certain —
On sentiment we draw the curtain;
Two-legged millions are our tools;
Emotion is for clowns and fools.
Eugene, more tolerant than many.
Yet, as a rule, despised mankind;
Exceptions may be hard to find,
But there’s no rule that has not any:
He scorned most men (not every one).
Esteemed emotion, feeling none.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
He listened to young Lensky, smiling:
The poet’s ardent speech, the mind
XV So immature and so beguiling.
The fiery glance, he could but find
A novelty framed to divert him;
He thought: I must not disconcert him
By mocking glance or chilly word,
Such bliss is transient, if absurd;
Since time, without my interference,
Wili cure the lad, for good or ill.
Let him believe in wonders still
And credit the world’s fair appearance; 
Youth’s fever is its own excuse 
For ravings that it may induce.
In deep reflection, hot discussion.
Their meetings passed; in turn they spoke
XVI Of foreign history and Russian,
Of prejudice’s ancient yoke,
Of good and evil, and of science,
Of destiny and its defiance.
Of that dread mystery, the grave;
Their judgment both men freely gave.
The poet in his exaltation
Would cite a verse he had by heart,
Some fragment of his Northern art.
And clinch the point with a quotation.
Though Eugene lent a willing ear.
He found the matter not too clear.
The passions, though, concerned more often
Our talkative young eremites;
XVll Onegin’s mocking voice would soften
As he depicted their delights;
He sighed, no longer subject to them:
Most blessed is he who never knew them.
And blessed the man who rids him of 
Their pangs, and he, remote from love,
Who never longed and never hated.
Who, yawning, with his friends and wife.
In gossip finds the spice of life,
AU jealous thoughts evaporated —
The happy man who took no chance
At cards with his inheritance!
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Two
xix
^ hen we seek refuge, growing colder.
Beneath the prudent flag of peace.
When passion’s fires no longer smolder,
And all their w’ayward stirrings cease, 
And when we find our old devotion 
No more a reason for emotion,
And its late sequel as absurd.
We yet attend upon the word
That trembles with another’s passion; 
The heart recalls its ancient scars,
As one who fought forgotten wars
Reviews the past in wistful fashion:
A veteran W'ho never fails
To hang upon the young bloods’ tales.
But fiery youth cannot dissemble
Its love or anger, grief or joy;
It all pours forth from lips that tremble
With the avow'als of a boy.
Wearing a look of self-possession,
Onegin heard the sweet confession
His friend unburdened himself of —
He was a veteran in love.
Freely the poet spoke and truly,
His heart was pure, his conscience clear;
Onegin was allowed to hear 
In full the tender story duly,
A tale of sentiment not new,
These many years, to me, or you.
He loved as people love no longer
Whose hearts the years at length anneal; 
His was the love of poets, stronger 
Than other men are doomed to feel:
He knew one constant inspiration.
And not long years of separation,
Nor distance, changed his earnest mood
Or brought his longing quietude.
Not hours when he fulfilled the duties
That poets owe imto the Muse,
Nor studies such as pedants choose,
Nor noisy games, nor foreign beauties.
Could alter Lensky’s virgin soul 
Where love burned like a living coal.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
When scarce a lad, his heart was captured —
A heart that had not felt a pang —
Xxi By little Olga, and, enraptured.
He watched her as she played and sang;
And one would find the children roaming
Together in the forest gloaming;
The fathers, indeed all, could see
Their marriage was a certainty.
Watched fondly, in seclusion growing,
The charming and ingenuous maid
Bloomed like a flower in the shade;
A lily of the valley blowing
In the thick grass where none can see,
Unknown to butterfly and bee.
The poet’s earliest elation
Young Olga was the first to stir;
XXll She was his lyre’s first inspiration,
His virgin lyric was of her.
But now adieu, oh, golden playtime!
He loved the dark and shunned the daytime,
And craved the forest’s shady boon.
The silent stars, the brooding moon —
The moon, the lampion of heaven.
To which we vowed our walks apart,
Whose secret solace on the heart
Would drop so tenderly at even . . .
Though now a light of no repute.
The street-lamps’ pallid substitute.
As grateful as a kiss, as simple
As Lensky’s life that knew no guile,
XXlll Was gentle Olga — ^in her dimple
One saw the cheerful morning smile;
Her sky-blue eyes, her cheeks like roses,
Her flaxen hair, her graceful poses.
Her voice, were such as they portray
In all the novels of the day.
There was a time when the portrayal
Was one that I found exquisite.
But now I am fed up with it;
Dear reader, pardon the betrayal;
And I shall speak, if you allow,
About her older sister now.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
XXV
Though it suggests a peasant’s hovel,
Tatyana was her sister’s name:
For the first time in any novel
It humbly asks romantic fame.
Why not? You can have no objection.
Though it is true your recollection 
Of syllables so musical 
Is bound up with the servants’ hall.
With olden days and doddering nurses:
We can’t please the fastidious.
For there’s a lack of taste in us.
And in our names (and in our verses);
Enlightenment makes such as we 
No finer, but just finicky.
Tatyana was her name then — granted.
She would not win you by her face,
She lacked her sister’s charm, and wanted
Her rosy innocence and grace.
No, silent, wild, and melancholy,
And swift to flee from fun and folly,
Shy as the doe who runs alone.
She seemed a stranger to her own.
To fondle either parent never
Was our morose Tatyana’s way.
And as a child she’d romp and play
With other children scarcely ever.
But by the window she would brood
The whole day through in solitude.
Since infancy her only pleasure
Was reverie; she wreathed with dream 
The placid course of rustic leisure;
Her tender fingers sewed no seam,
Nor was she found with head inclining
O’er her embroidery, designing 
In colored silks a pattern fit 
To make a guest exclaim at it.
The will to rule is seen thus early:
The child while still at play prepares
For all her future social cares 
And the polite world’s hurly-burly.
And tells her doll with anxious thought
The maxims her mamma has taught.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
cxviii
But even then, and more’s the pity,
Tatyana had no doll at all
To gossip to about the city
And what the fashions were that fall.
She was not one of those who glories
In mischief, but horrific stories 
Enchanted her while yet a child,
In winter when the nights were wild.
And when the little girls collected
To tag each other, or to roam 
The woods, Tatyana stayed at home,
By solitude nowise dejected;
Her dreamy mood did not consort
With laughter and with noisy sport.
Tatyana might be found romancing
Upon her balcony alone
Just as the stars had left off dancing.
When dawn’s fiirst ray had barely shown;
When the cool messenger of morning.
The wind, would enter, gently warning
That day would soon be on the march.
And wake the birds in beech and larch.
In winter, when night’s shade encloses
More lingeringly half the world.
And in the misty moonlight furled.
The lazy Orient longer dozes.
Roused at her wonted hour from rest,
By candle-light she rose and dressed.
She found in a romantic story
All one might care to be or know;
Living the chapters through, she’d glory
In Richardson as in Rousseau.
Her father saw no harm in reading
(He was a decent chap, conceding 
He lived in quite another age);
But then he never read a page.
He did not know that books could say things
To move you even while you slept;
He thought the tomes his daughter kept
Beneath her pillow, empty playthings;
While, on the other hand, his wife
Held Richardson as dear as life.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
xxxii
The lady’s lasting admiration
The novelist had long since won;
She had not read with fascination
Of Lovelace or of Grandison,
But she had heard of them a dozen
Or more times JBrom her Moscow cousin, 
Princess Aline, when she was young,
And when, besides, her heart was wrung:
She was affianced, but her mother
Had made the choice, ’twas not her own;
Her heart was filled with one alone.
For, sad to say, she loved another:
A Grandison attached to cards,
A beau, a sergeant of the Guards.
She followed, as he did, the fashion;
On elegance her mind w^as bent.
But what availed her urgent passion?
They married her sans her consent.
Her prudent husband, to distract her.
Off to the country promptly packed her,
Hoping her grief might thus abate;
They settled dowm on his estate.
Where she, with God knows who for neighbors.
At first but wept and tore her hair.
Spoke of divorce in her despair.
Then plunged into domestic labors:
Content, since habit, more or less,
Is surrogate for happiness.
Kind habit soothed her sorrow sweetly.
Until a great discovery
Consoled the lady quite completely.
And grief changed to serenity.
Between her hours of toil and leisure
The good wdfe took her husband’s measure. 
And kept him underneath her rule.
She did the overseeing; cool
And resolute, she shipped the peasant
For army service; kept the books;
She pickled mushrooms with her cooks;
Slapped servant-girls who were unpleasant;
And steamed herself on Saturday —
Her spouse had not a word to say.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Time was when she would be composing
An album verse with tender mien;
XXXlll She used a sing-song voice; and, posing,
Praskovya she would call '^Pauline”;
She pinched her waist with tightened laces,
Affected a most nasal '^'n”;
But years went rolling by, and then
She lost her Frenchy airs and graces;
The album and the corset vanished,
The tender verse. Princess Pauline;
She said "Akulka” for Celine;
The nasal twang she also banished.
And wore — her last defences down —
A mob-cap and a dressing-gown.
But her good husband loved her dearly,
And trusted her with house and pelf,
XXXIV And never looked at her too nearly —
He wore a dressing-gown himself;
His life, that knew no cares or labors,
Rolled by in peace; sometimes the neighbors
Would, in a body, call at eve.
To talk and sigh, to jest or grieve
Over some ordinary matter.
And time would pass, and there would be
Young Olga coming to make tea,
And to put finis to their chatter;
They’d sup, then time for sleep drew nigh.
And so the guests would say good-bye.
They loved the good old ways, and wallowed
At Carnival in savory cheer,
XXXV Eating the pancakes custom hallowed;
They took communion twice a year;
At Christmas, carols were their pleasure;
They liked to tread a country measure;
At Whitsun, when the populace
Yawned through the long thanksgiving mass,
They too were of their duties heedful,
And on the lovage dropped a tear.
Holding their pious habits dear;
As men need air, they found kvass needful,
Liked hearty guests who ate and drank,
And served each course to them by rank.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Tivo
xxxvii
And so they aged, like all things mortal,
And in due time the husband passed 
Submissive through the grave’s dark portal. 
And wore the funeral wTeath at last.
A tender father, a good master.
His passing came as a disaster
To friend and child and faithful wife;
He’d led a kind and simple life;
He died a short hour before dinner.
His epitaph is plain as he;
Graved on the monument you see:
' ’Dmitry Larin, a poor sinner,
God’s servant, and a brigadier,
Come to eternal rest, lies here.”
Come home again, young Lensky duly
Beheld the bed where all must lie,
And by those ashes, mourning truly,
Paid them the tribute of a sigh.
’’Alas, poor Yorick!” he lamented,
’’Once in those arms I lay contented,
And took his medal for a toy
When I was but a tiny boy!
He hoped that in good time I’d marry
His Olga. I can hear him say:
’May I but live to see the day!
When we were young, we did not tarry.’ ”
And Lensky, grieving honestly,
Wrote, on the spot, an elegy.
And there he also wrote another
Upon the patriarchal dust,
And w^ept his father and his mother . . .
Alas! by God’s strange will we must 
Behold each generation flourish,
And watch life’s furrows briefly nourish
The perishable human crop.
Which ripens fairly, but to drop;
And where one falls, another surges . . .
The race of men recks nothing, save
Its reckless growth: into the grave 
The grandfathers it promptly urges.
Our time will come when it is due,
Our grandchildren evict us too.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Two
Meanwhile, forget all toil and trouble,
Take what is offered of delight.
I know that life is but a bubble,
My fondness for it is but slight;
I am deceived by no illusion;
But I salute hope’s shy intrusion,
And sometimes in my heart I own
I would not leave the world, unknown.
I have no faith in its requiting
My labors, yet perhaps this name 
May wear the laurel -crown of fame,
And yet win luster from my writing;
One line, held in the memory.
May speak, like a fond friend, of me.
My words may move some unborn lover;
My stanza, saved by jealous fate,
It may be Lethe will not cover;
Ah, yes, at some far distant date,
When I am gone, and cannot know it.
The cordial words: 'There was a poet!” 
Some dunce may yet pronounce as he 
Points out my portrait unctuously.
Such are the bard’s gratifications;
My thanks, friend, you will not refuse.
You venerator of the Muse
Who will recall my poor creations.
You who will smooth in after days
With kindly hand the old man’s bays.
Chapter Three
ELLE ETOIT FILLE, ELLE ETOIT AMOUREUSE.
liULFILATRE
'^These poets! What! another visit?”
"Good-bye, Onegin, I must go.”
"I shan’t detain you; but where is it
You spend your time, I’d like to know?”
"These evenings? At the Larins’.” "Splendid.
But, Lord, before the evening’s ended 
How is it that you do not fall 
Asleep j&rom boredom?” "Not at all.”
"I cannot grasp it. I’ll be betting
Here’s what you find there (am I right?) :
The guests are greeted with delight;
You have a Russian family setting,
With tea and jam, and endless tattle
About the weather, flax, and cattle . . .”
"I see no harm in that; I’m grateful.”
"But it’s a bore, my firiend, that’s clear.”
"Your fashionable world is hateful;
I find the plain home circle dear.
Where I can . . .” "Ah, another pretty
Bucolic piece! Good Lord, have pity!
Well, must you go now? Not so fast!
When shall I meet the girl at last
Whom you have found so interesting?
I’d like to see with my own eyes
Your Phyllis, whom you idolize.
Pray introduce me.” "You are jesting.”
"No.” "Gladly.” "When?” "At once. You’ll see
How very welcome you will be.”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
"Let’s go.”
The friends, without delaying,
Hi Dashed off; arrived; and heartily
Were greeted, with almost dismaying
Old-fashioned hospitality.
The table shone with wax; they handed
The saucers of preserve about.
Set huckleberry syrup out.
Just as the social rites demanded.
They travel homeward quickly, choosing.
For it is late, the shortest way;
IV And reader, you are not refusing
To overhear what they may say.
^^Well, now, Onegin. Yawning?” ^Merely
A habit, Lensky.” ^"^Oh, but clearly,
You’re bored.” ”As ever. But I mark
That we are driving in the dark.
Be quick! Drive on!” he bids the peasant;
”This silly landscape! Never mind;
Your Madam Larina’s, I find,
A nice old woman, plain but pleasant.
That huckleberry syrup will,
I’ve a suspicion, make me ill.
''But tell me, which one is Tatyana?”
"She sat beside the window. She
V Is like the poet’s maid, Svetlana,
Given to mournful reverie.”
"You love the younger? Curious creature!”
"Why do you say so?” "Not a feature 
Of Olga’s looks alive to me.
Her sister tempts the Muse, not she.
Your Olga’s face, so round and blooming.
Is like Van Dyck’s Madonna. Fie!
Or like, up in the silly sky.
That silly moon you see there looming.”
Vladimir made a dry response 
And then sat silent for the nonce.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
The neighbors, pleasantly diverted,
Asked what Onegin’s visit meant,
VI And one and all of them exerted
Themselves to find out his intent.
Tatyana’s match was ail the rumor;
They gossiped on, in high good humor.
If there w'as carping comment, too;
And there were those who said they knew
The plans to have been consummated,
But that the wedding was deferred
Because they lacked — hadn’t one heard? — 
The rings that the new mode dictated.
Of Lensky’s troth there was no chatter:
His wedding was a settled matter.
Tatyana listened with vexation
To gossip; but her heart would fill 
vil With a strange, secret exultation;
She conned the talk against her will;
A thought was born, and grew, unbidden;
Thus grows a seed the earth has hidden 
When springtime’s sun shines warm above: 
The time had come — she was in love.
Long since her dreams had set her yearning
And coveting the fatal food;
Long since with sweet disquietude
Had her shy wistful heart been burning; 
And freighted with a youthful gloom 
Her soul was waiting . . . ah, for whom?
He came. And her eyes opened. Quaking,
She whispered to herself: ’Tis he!
VVll Alas, in dreams, asleep or waking,
From thoughts of him she is not firee;
All speaks of him, but to confound her;
His magic presence hovers round her;
And so from idle talk she flies.
And from the servants’ anxious eyes.
Plunged into sadness beyond measure. 
When guests arrive she pays no heed.
But wishes them away with speed.
And curses their unwelcome leisure;
She hates their having come at all.
Their endlessly protracted caU.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Now with what eager concentration
She reads the sweet romance, and how
IX Discovers a new fascination
In its seductive figments now!
The creatures fancy animated;
Werther, to be a martyr fated,
Malek-Adhel and de Linar,
St. Preux, the rival of Wolmar,
And Grandison, who leaves us sleeping.
The matchless bore — on these she mused; 
And all, our tender dreamer fused 
Into one image, her heart leaping 
As fancy in the lot would trace 
Onegin’s form, Onegin’s face.
And so her quick imagination
Reveals herself in every scene;
X She is the novelist’s creation:
Julie, Clarissa, or Delphine;
She wanders with imagined lovers
Through silent woods, and she discovers 
Her dreams in every circumstance 
Of some imported wild romance. 
Another’s joy her heart possesses. 
Another’s grief is hers to rue,
And in her mind a billet-doux
To her dear hero she addresses.
The hero we’re intent upon.
However, was no Grandison.
There was a time when the impassioned
Romancer, having settled on 
xi A noble style of writing, fashioned
The pattern of a paragon.
His soul by highest motives guided,
The darling object was provided
With a fine mind and handsome face;
His enemies were always base.
This ever -rapturous hero, burning
With pure devotion, knew no bliss 
So exquisite as sacrifice;
And to the final pages turning.
You’d find the way of vice was hard,
And virtue won its due reward.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
But now all minds are fogged and cloudy,
We’re put to sleep by moral tales;
XU We like romances not too rowdy
Wherein agreeable vice prevails.
The British Muse’s wild invention
Lays claim to the young girl’s attention; 
Dark Melmoth fills her wuth delight;
The Vampire wrecks her sleep at night;
She loves the secrets that environ 
The Corsair or the Wandering Jew; 
Strange Jean Sbogar enchants her too.
By a most happy whim. Lord Byron
Has clothed a hopeless egoism 
In saturnine romanticism.
Ail this is futile, and you know it,
My friends. Perhaps, by heaven’s decree,
Xlll I shall yet cease to be a poet;
Another demon seizing me,
I shall defy the dread ApoUo,
Content in my old age to follow
The fashion of a bygone day:
Write prose, and take the humbler way;
I’ll tell no ghostly tales, or gory.
Or paint the villain’s agony;
A simple Russian family
Will be the subject of my story.
And love’s delicious dream, and, too,
The customs that our elders knew.
The father’s simple words repeating.
Or the old uncle’s, I shall tell
xiv Next of the children’s breathless meeting.
Where lindens hide the lovers well;
Of jealous pangs, and separation,
And tears of reconciliation
After they’ve quarreled once again;
I’ll bring them to the altar then . . .
I shall recall the tongue of longing.
The languors of a distant day.
When at my mistress’ feet I lay
And to my lips the words came thronging;
The lover’s language, the sweet vow,
Of which I’ve lost the habit now.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Tatyana, dear Tatyana! Weeping,
I share the scalding tears you drop:
XV Your fate is put into the keeping
Of a most tyrannous young fop.
And you, my dear, are doomed to perish;
But first, what dark delight you cherish, 
What dazzling hopes awhile are yours.
As you discover life’s allures,
And drink desire’s sweet poisoned potion.
You dwell in dreams, and you persist 
In fancying a happy tryst 
In every nook, with strange emotion;
And everywhere that you may turn
Your marked seducer you discern.
Her grief into the garden taking,
Tatyana goes, impelled by love.
XVl She drops her eyes, her heart is aching.
Her languor will not let her move.
Her eyes shine, and her breath has dwindled.
Her chest heaves, and her cheeks are kindled 
With flame that fails as it appears;
There is a roaring in her ears . . .
Night falls; the moon, already riding
Aloft, the whole of heaven sees;
The nightingale’s keen melodies
Pour from the boughs where she is hiding. 
Sleepless, Tatyana would converse 
In gentle whispers with her nurse.
'T cannot sleep, nurse; it is stifling!
Open the window; come, sit here.”
Xvii ”What ails you, Tanya?” ^^Oh, it’s trifling,
I’m bored; tell me a story, dear.”
"A story?” asked the good old woman,
”Of maids and creatures superhuman?
Ah, yes, I knew such old wives’ tales,
But I grow old, and memory fails;
How sad it is to be forgetting!
I’ve fallen on black days, my dear —
I lose the thread, my mind’s not clear.
It is no wonder I am fretting . .
”But, nurse, you still can tell me of
Your own young days. Were you in love?”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
xix
''What notions! You may find it blameless.
But in my youth no one engaged 
In talk of love. It was thought shameless — 
My mother-in-law would have raged.”
"But you were married, nurse,” said Tanya,
"How was it?” "By God’s will, my Vanya 
Was but a boy, if truth were told.
And I was just thirteen years old.
The marriage-broker kept on pressing
The matter for a fortnight; oh.
What tears I shed you do not know.
The day my father gave his blessing;
They loosed my braids, and singing low
Led me to church. I had to go.
"I lived, by strangers quite surrounded.
My husband’s folk . . . But do you hear?”
"Ah, nurse, nurse darling, I am hounded 
By longing. I am ill, I fear:
I want to cry, to sob — oh, nursey!”
"My child, you’re ill! The Lord have mercy!
God grant it’s nothing! Welladay!
How can I help you, only say!
I’ll sprinkle you with holy water.
You have a fever . . .” "Fever, no:
I . . . I’m in love,” she murmured low.
The nurse replied: "God save you, daughter!”
And crossed the girl, and as she made 
The sign with shaking hand, she prayed.
"I am in love,” poor Tanya uttered
The words again with stifled moan.
"Dear, you are ill,” the old nurse muttered.
"I am in love; leave me alone.”
Meanwhile, the moon her silver duty
Performing, lit the girl’s pale beauty,
And with a somber splendor shone
On her loose hair, her tears, and on 
The bench where the old nurse was seated 
In kerchief and long gown of wool.
Before her charge, whose eyes were full.
Whose posture was of one defeated.
And while the world in silence slept.
The moon her magic vigil kept.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
The mooB’s enchantment so obsessed her.
Her son! to distant regions fled,
XXI And then a sudden thought possessed her . . .
^"Go, leave me, nurse,” Tatyana said,
”Move up the table, give me paper,
And pen; good night.” Her single taper
Is the benign and silent moon;
Alone, Tatyana broods, and soon
Propped on her elbow, she is writing. 
Thinking of Eugene all the while.
A young girl’s ardor, clear of guile.
Breathes through the words she is inditing.
The letter’s ready to be sent;
For whom, Tatyana, is it meant?
I have known women, stern and rigid.
Great ladies, far too proud to fall,
XXii As pure as winter, and as frigid;
I understood them not at all.
I marveled at their iron virtue,
Their freezing glances framed to hurt you.
And sooth, I fled these haughty belles 
Upon whose brows methought was hell’s 
Inscription written: ”Ye surrender 
All hope, for aye, who enter here.”
They like to fill a man with fear.
And shun the heart that would be tender.
By the Neva it may be you
Have seen such ladies, not a few
And where the faithful suitor hovers,
I have seen other belles who bent
XXlll A glance upon their urgent lovers.
Self-centered and indifferent.
And what was my amazement, finding
They sought to make love’s ties more binding 
By an assumed austerity;
And fright but bred fidelity;
At least, if pity seemed to soften
Their voices, and their words were kind, 
Young love, because it is so blind,
Would grow more ardent very often,
And the fond fool would then pursue
The unconcerned beloved anew.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
XXV
Why is Tatyana an offender?
Is it because she cannot deem
Deceit exists, but clings with tender 
Simplicity to her young dream?
Is it because her love is artless.
And she, not knowing men are heartless,
Obeys her feelings sans demur?
Or because Heaven gifted her
With fiery imagination.
With rebel will and lively mind.
And wdth a heart for love designed,
A spirit brooking no dictation?
And can you not forgive, if she
Shows passion’s volatility?
Not like a cool coquette w^ho tenders
Her heart, and when she likes, 'withdraws, 
Tatyana like a child surrenders 
Herself to love and all its laws.
She does not argue: by delaying
We win the game that w^e are playing.
And raise love’s value cleverly;
First let us prick his vanity
With hope, then prove it an illusion,
Raise doubts that leave his heart perplexed,
With jealousy revive it next.
And thus reduce him to confusion;
Lest, sick of pleasure, momently
The sly thrall struggle to be free.
But I foresee a fresh objection.
And I confess I am perplexed:
Could Russia pardon my defection
Should I not give the letter’s text 
In Russian? And the task’s infernal. 
Tatyana read no Russian journal.
She did not speak the language well
And found it rather hard to spell;
And so of course the girl decided
To -write in French . , . What’s to be done? 
For lady never, no, not one.
Her love in Russian has confided;
Our native tongue turns up its nose
At mere epistolary prose.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
xxviii
They say the ladies should read Russian,
But though the arguments are keen,
I cannot suffer the discussion —
To find a Moscow magazine
In those white hands would be distressing! 
The fair ones, whom you were addressing 
With flattering pen and heart aglow.
Were all of them, as well you know.
My poet friends, inclined to stammer
When they employed the mother-tongue;
We loved them, though, when we were young
For just those little slips of grammar;
The foreign tongue is native to
Those lovely lips; is it not true?
To see a pedant in a bonnet!
A scholar in a yellow shawl!
Pray God I do not come upon it
Where guests disperse, or at a ball!
I hate red lips that are unsmiling,
And likewise do not find beguiling
The sound of Russian when correct;
Slight errors have a choice effect.
Perhaps, heeding the journals’ clamor.
The younger beauties will declare
That poetry is their affair.
And will accustom us to grammar;
But as for me . . . my loving praise
Is for the good old-fashioned ways.
My heart will as of old be shaken.
Touched by the careless twittering,
The phrasing, awkward or mistaken,
Of some attractive little thing.
I am not given to repentance —
French turns will please me in a sentence
As do the sins of years long fled 
Or light verse that our fathers read.
Enough. ’Tis time that I presented
The letter to you quite intact.
By God! I wish I could retract.
Was ever harder task invented?
Parny’s sad tenderness is now
No more the vogue, you will allow.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
xxxi
Tatyana’s
TO ONEGIN
Singer of feasts and tender sorrow,
If only you were with me still,
I might indeed make bold to borrow
Your magic music and your skill:
Your version of Tatyana’s letter
Would be in every way far better 
Than anything that I could do —
I bow and cede my rights to you . . .
But no, our paths have separated.
To praises imaccustomed grown.
Beneath the Finnish sky, alone.
Among sad chffs he moves. I’m fated
To mourn his absence, and in vain.
He does not even guess my pain.
Tatyana’s letter lies before me,
I treasure it most piously;
These artless lines can never bore me.
They touch the springs of reverie.
Who taught her how to be so lavish
With ardent words, and how to ravish 
The heart with virgin tenderness?
Where did she learn this wild excess?
Love’s discourse, perilous, delicious,
She knew, I wonder how. I fear
The version of it given here 
Is like a copy pale and vicious,
Or like an air from Freischiitz played
By someone awkward and afraid.
I vurite you, and my act is serving
As my confession. Why say more?
LETTER I know of whot I am deserving —
That you should scorn me, or ignore.
But for my wretched fate preserving
A drop of pity, you^ll forebear 
To give me over to despair.
I first resolved upon refraining
From speech: you never would have learned
The secret shame with which I burned^
If there had been a hope remaining
That I should see you once a week 
Or less, that I should hear you speak.
And answer with the barest greeting.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
Bat have one things when you were gone^
One thing alone to think upon 
Tatyana’s letter For days^ until another meeting.
TO ONEGIN But you^re unsociable, they say.
The country, and its dulness, bore you;
W'^e ... we don'll shine in any way.
But have a warm, frank welcome for you.
W hy did you come to visit us?
Here in this village unfrequented.
Not knowing you, I would not thus
Have learned how hearts can be tormented.
I might (who knows?) have grown contented.
My girlish dreams forever stilled.
And found a partner in another.
And been a faithful wife and mother.
And loved the duties well fulfilled.
Another ! . . . No, I could have given
My heart to one, and one alone!
It was decreed ... the will of Heaven
Ordains it so: I am your own.
All my past life has had one meaning —
That I should meet you. God on High 
Has sent you, and I shall be leaning 
On your protection till I die . . .
You came in dreams: I feared to waken,
I loved your image even then;
I trembled at your glance, and when
You spoke, my very soul was shaken.
Only a dream? It could not be!
The moment that I saw you coming,
I burned, my pulses started drumming.
And my heart whispered: it is he!
Yes, deep within I had the feeling.
When at my tasks of charity.
Or when, the world about me reeling,
I looked for peace in prayer, kneeling.
That silently you spoke to me.
Just now, did I not see you flitting
Through the dim room where I am sitting.
To stand, dear vision, by my bed?
Was it not you who gently gave me
A word to solace and to save me:
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
The hope on which my heart is fed?
Are you a guardian angel to me?
Tatyana’s letter Or but a tempter to undo me?
TO ONEGIN Dispel my doubts! My mind^s awhirl;
Perhaps this is a mad delusion^
The folly of a simple girl:
Fate plans a different conclusion . . .
So be it! Now my destiny
Lies in your hands, for you to fashion;
Forgive the tears you wring from me,
I throw myself on your compassion . . .
Imagine: here I am alone.
With none to understand or cherish
My restless thoughts, and I must perish. 
Stifled, in solitude, unknown.
I wait: when once your look has spoken.
The heart once more with hope will glow.
Or a deserved reproach will show
The painful dream forever broken!
Reread I cannot ... I must end . . .
The fear, the shame, are past endurance . . .
U pon your honor I depend.
And lean upon it with assurance . . .
Tatyana moans, and as she shivers
The letter shakes; she heaves a sigh;
XXXll Upon her tongue the wafer quivers —
Both tongue and seal are pink, are dry.
Her nightgown slips from off her shoulder,
And her head sinks. The dawn grows bolder, 
And soon the east will be alight;
The moon is fading with the night;
The lifting mist reveals the pleasant
Pale valley and the silver stream;
The first shy rays begin to gleam;
The shepherd’s horn awakes the peasant;
’Tis morning; all the world’s astir:
It makes no difference to her.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
xxxiv
Dawn’s air is sweet, she does not feel it.
She sits with downcast head, too lax
To take the letter up and seal it 
With her neat monogram in wax.
The old gray nurse thinks she is napping
And enters softly without rapping,
Upon her tray a steaming cup:
'^Come now, my child, it’s time: get up.
But you’re already dressed! God save me.
You are an early bird! Last night
I left you in a dreadful fright;
But never mind the turn you gave me;
I see the pain has left no trace;
A poppy could not match your face.”
”Ah, nurse, I know you won’t refuse me.”
^’Of course not, darling, only say ...”
”Don’t think . . . but really . . . don’t accuse me . . .
Do me this favor, nurse, I pray.”
”God knows how gladly, only say it . . .”
”Then bid your grandson — don’t delay it —
Carry this letter secretly
To 0 . . . our neighbor. Oh, but he
Must breathe no word, must never mention
My name . . .” ^'^Yes, but to whom, my dear?
I must be growing dull, I fear.
Although indeed I paid attention.
We have so many neighbors, I
Could scarcely count them, should I try.”
^Tfow dull-witted you are, nurse, truly!”
^'The mind grows blunt as one grows old;
Age comes to all, my darling, duly.
The master had no need to scold
When I was young — a mere suggestion ...”
”Ah, nurse, your mind is not in question.
What difference does that make to me?
It is my letter, don’t you see.
My letter to Onegin.” ”Bless me,
Do not be cross because I fail
To grasp things . . . But you’re growing pale;
Tanya, my dear, your looks distress me.”
”0h, it is nothing, nurse, I know.
Be sure you have your grandson go.”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
xxxvii
The day is done: he’s not replying,
Another day: he still is dumb;
Dressed early, shadow-pale, and sighing,
She waits: when will the answer come? 
Then Olga’s suitor paid a visit.
’^Has he forgotten us — what is it?
Where is your Mend?” the hostess said;
Tatyana trembled and grew red. 
’'Something detained him. He intended 
To come today, and without fail.
Perhaps what kept him was the mail,”
Thus Lensky his good Mend defended.
Tatyana looked as though she heard 
A black reproach in every word.
At dusk the samovar is gleaming
Upon the table, piping hot;
And as it hisses, gently steaming.
The vapor wreathes the china pot.
Now Olga sits before it, filling
The lustrous tea-cups, never spilling 
A drop of the dark fragrant stream;
A serving-lad hands round the cream.
Apart, Tatyana can but linger
Beside the window; on the pane 
She breathes again and yet again,
And in the mist her little finger
Describes in pensive tracery 
The hallowed letters O and E.
But her soul aches, and nothing pleases.
Her eyes betray her with a tear.
The sudden soimd of hoofs! . . . She freezes.
Now nearer! Galloping . . . and here 
Is Eugene! By another portal 
Tatyana leaps like nothing mortal 
From porch to court, and shadow-light 
She flies, she flies, nor in her flight 
Looks backward; lightning-like she rushes 
On past the bright parterre, the lawn.
The grove, the bridge, the lake, and on.
And fleeing, breaks the lilac-bushes,
And gains the brookside, breathing fast.
Where, on a rustic bench at last
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
She falls . . .
here! Eugene!'’ she panted;
XXxix God, what can he think of me?”
Her anguished heart some peace w as granteti
By a dark hope of what might be.
Tatyana burned and shivered, asking:
’’He’s coming?” But in silence basking.
The country round about was still,
Save for the chorus on the hill
Where the maids sang to keep from cheating
The masters of the berry -crop.
They dared not let their voices drop:
For if they sing, they can’t be eating
(A shrewd command that perfectly 
Proves rustic ingenuity!).
Merrily^ my laughing ones.
Maidens, come and trip it now,
maids’ song Come and form a circle and
Foot it neatly on the green!
Girls, strike up a melody.
Sing a song, a happy song.
Sing and bring a dashing lad
Hither to our frolic and 
W hen he comes, ah, when he comes.
When we see him nearing us.
Fly, my darlings, run away.
Pelt the lad with cherries ripe.
Cherries and red raspberries.
Fling him currants ripe and red.
Eavesdroppers, be off, auxiyl
Not for you our songs are sung.
Do not spy upon our games.
Come away, girls, come away!
Tatyana hears the chorus sounding,
But heedlessly; she cannot school
xl Her shaken heart to stop its pounding,
Or wait for her hot cheeks to cool.
But still she pants, her terror growing.
And hotter yet the blush is glowing
Upon her shamed and flaming cheeks;
Thus a poor moth imprisoned seeks
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Three
To free its wings, and frantic, pushes
Against the palm that holds it tight: 
Thus a gray hare will quake with fright 
Glimpsing behind the distant bushes 
A crouching huntsman, ill -concealed, 
And stop defenceless in the field.
At last she rose, and gently sighing
She sought the path, but as she turned, 
xH Before her, there was no denying,
Eugene himself with eyes that burned
Stood like a threatening apparition;
As though she feared an inquisition
She halted, like one scorched by fire. 
But what w^as further to transpire 
After this imexpected meeting,
I cannot say; I’ve talked so long
That I am feeling far from strong; 
Forgive me, then, for thus retreating. 
Just now a walk w’ould suit me best.
In time I shall relate the rest.
Chapter Four
JA MORALE EST DANS LA NATURE DES CHOSES.
NECKER
[i-vij A woman’s love for us increases
The less we love her, sooth to say —
vii She stoops, she falls, her struggling ceases;
Caught fast, she cannot get away.
Once lechery that took its pleasure
And boasted, bold beyond all measure. 
And never loved where it desired,
Was all the art of love required.
In this important sport the jaded
Old monkeys of another age 
Were proper people to engage;
Now Lovelace’s renown is faded.
Gone with the styles we do not use,
With proud perukes and red-heeled shoes.
Who would not weary of evasion.
And of repeating platitudes,
viii Of holding forth with great persuasion
On themes to which none now alludes,
Of finding worn-out prejudices.
That even thirteen-year-old misses
Would scarcely call intelligent.
The subject of an argmnent?
Who would not tire of threats and rages,
Entreaties, vows, and foolish fears.
Deceit and gossip, rings and tears,
Of letters running to six pages.
Mammas and aunts who pry and peer.
And friendly husbands’ heavy cheer?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Thus Eugene thought with melancholy.
In his first youth he w'as the prey
IX Of many a wild fit of folly.
And never said his passions nay.
A pampered boy, allured by pleasure.
Then disappointed beyond measure, 
Wearied by what he had desired.
By facile conquest swiftly tired.
At noisy gatherings and after.
In silence, hearing still the faint
Sad murmur of the soul’s complaint.
And covering a yawn with laughter —
He killed eight years thus like a dunce —
The flower of life that blooms but once.
Allured by neither looks nor station.
His courting now was minus zest;
X Refused — he soon found consolation;
Betrayed — he took a welcome rest. 
Though he pursued, the chase was palling; 
Both love and malice scarce recalling, 
Ladies he left he never missed.
Thus, for an evening game of whist,
A guest comes, an indifferent player;
Sits down; the game is done — ^he goes;
Drives home to take his night’s repose,
His mood no gloomier, no gayer;
Not knowing in the morning where
When evening comes he will repair.
But our Onegin’s heart was stricken
When Tanya’s tender message came;
XI Its girlish fire began to quicken
A swarm of thoughts exempt from blame.
Again her pale face looms before him,
Her melancholy eyes adore him —
And as on these his fancy dwelt,
Onegin a pure rapture felt.
Perchance he briefly knew the fever
That thrilled him in the days gone by,
And yet her trust he’d not belie,
He would not play the base deceiver.
But to the garden let us race
Where Tanya met him face to face.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Two minutes passed with neither speaking,
Then he came up to her and said: 
xil ''You wrote me. There is no use seeking
To disavow- it now-. I read
A pure love’s innocent effusion;
Your candor filled me with confusion;
I read a shy, confiding word.
And feelings, long quiescent, stirred;
I w-ould not praise you, but sincerely
I w-ould requite sincerity;
You may expect no less firom me;
Your frank avow-al touched me nearly.
Hear my confession, then, I pray.
And you shall judge me as you may.
"If I were one of those w-ho rather
Enjoy staid domesticity,
Xlll If as a husband and a father
The kindly fates had fancied me.
Where should I seek a dearer treasure?
If for a moment I found pleasure
In cosy scenes of fireside life.
You, you alone would be my wife.
This is no rhetoric I’m using:
Finding my youthful dream come true —
All candor and all grace in you.
You are the helpmeet I’d be choosing:
A pledge of every loveliness.
And I’d be happy . . . more or less!
"I must confess, though loth to hurt you,
I was not bom for happiness;
XIV I am unworthy of your virtue;
I’d bring you nothing but distress.
My conscience speaks — ^pray let me finish;
My love, first warm, would soon diminish, 
Killed by familiarity;
Our marriage w-ould mean misery.
Then you will weep, but who supposes
Your grief wall bring me to remorse?
I shall lose patience soon, of course:
Infer, then, with what thorny roses
Hymen prepares to strew our way,
And that for many a long day.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
^^What is there more to be lamented
Than this: a household where the wife 
XV Whose spouse has left her, discontented.
Grieves for the wretch throughout her life,
While the dull husband, fully knowing 
Her worth, each year more sullen growing. 
And jealous in a frigid way.
Can only curse his wedding-day!
And I am such. Was it naught better
Than that you sought, poor innocent. 
When writing that intelligent,
That ardent and most charming letter?
The cruel fates have surely not 
Designed for you so sad a lot!
^^His days and dreams what man recovers?
Never shall I my soul renew . . .
XVI I feel, if not indeed a lover’s.
More than a brother’s love for you.
Be patient, then, as with a brother:
One cherished fancy for another
A girl will more than once forego.
As every spring the sapHngs show
New leaves for those the tempests scatter. 
So Heaven wills it. Your young soul 
Will love again. But self-control,
My dear, is an important matter:
Though I was worthy your belief,
Impulsiveness may lead to grief.”
So Eugene preached and Tanya listened,
Scarce breathing, making no replies,
XVil And blinded by the tears that glistened
Unheeded in her great dark eyes.
He offered her his arm. Despairing,
With drooping head and languid bearing
(Mechanically, as they say),
Tatyana took her silent way
Homeward, along the kitchen-garden;
And when they entered, arm in arm,
The company could see no harm
And nothing to remark or pardon;
For rustic freedom thus delights,
As does proud Moscow, in its rights.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
xix
In this affair our friend was tested
And behaved well, you will agree;
Thus once again he manifested
His soul’s innate nobility;
Though there are people, most malicious,
Who called him everything that’s vicious 
And had no word for him but blame —
Both friends and foes (they’re ail the same).
We need the wit that nature gave us 
To face our foes as all men must,
But from the ones we love and trust,
From our good friends, may Heaven save us!
These friends! ’tw^as not for nothing that 
They came into my mind so pat.
My meaning? Nothing. Aly intention
Is but to lull dark thoughts to sleep.
But in parenthesis I mention:
There is no calumny so deep.
Born of a liar in an attic.
There is no notion so erratic.
No fancy of a worldly mob.
No coarse mot of a witty snob.
That will not be ten times repeated
To decent folk, and with a smile.
By your good friend, all without guile,
And not a single w^ord deleted;
But he will back you while you live,
He loves you ... as a relative!
H’m, h’m! dear reader, pray apprise me.
Are all your relatives quite w ell?
You might be pleased — if so, advise me —
To have your humble servant tell
What the word relatives embraces.
It means the people to whose faces
We show at aU times due respect,
And whom we kiss as they expect,
And visit at the Christmas season,
Unless indeed we send a card
In token of our warm regard.
Lest they should miss us beyond reason
All during the ensuing year.
And so God grant them health and cheer!
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
If friends and kin are undeserving.
You may rely upon the fair,
XXI And firmly count upon preserving
Their love, though tempests fill the air.
Oh, yes. But there’s the whirl of fashion.
And then the wayward course of passion. 
And the opinion of the town . . .
The sex, of course, is light as do’^m.
And while a husband is respected
By any wife who’s virtuous.
By words and looks insidious
The faithful one is soon affected:
For woman is a tender fool,
And love is but the devil’s tool.
On whom shall we bestow affection,
And whom shall we confide in, pray?
XXli In whom discover no defection?
Who will assent to all we say?
Who will not seek our faults to flout us?
Who will not spread vile lies about us? 
Who will not weary us, with speed?
Who will supply our every need?
It is a phantom you are chasing,
And vainer labor there is none —
Love your own self and so have done!
This estimable friend embracing.
You prove you know, beyond a doubt,
Dear reader, what you are about-
What of the tryst, then, so iU-fated?
Alas, it is not hard to guess!
XXlll The pains of love still agitated
The soul so shy of happiness;
The promise of her spring was blighted,
But love grew greater, unreqmted;
She could but peak and pine and weep,
And night would find her far from sleep. 
Lost like a muted sound and vanished.
Her virgin calm is of the past;
Poor Tanya’s youth is fading fast,
And health and hope and joy are banished:
Thus darkly drives the storm that shrouds 
The blithest dawn in sullen clouds.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
XXV
Tatyana’s bloom is all but faded;
She sighs, she pines both day and night!
And all distraction finds her jaded,
She looks on nothing with delight.
The neighbors’ heads and tongues are wagging:
^^High time she w^ed!” But I am dragging 
My story out, and it is wrong 
To dwell on sorry things so long.
Now" let me speak of something jolly.
Portraying happy love for you;
Yet bidding the poor girl adieu,
I am assailed by melancholy;
Forgive me: Tanya, from the start,
Has held the first place in my heart.
From hour to hour yet more enraptured
By the young Olga’s winning ways,
Vladimir was completely captured
x4nd found his chains a thing to praise.
Alw"ays together, now they’re sitting
In her room w"hile the light is flitting;
Or in the morning, arm in arm.
The tw"o explore the garden’s charm.
And think of it! So timid is he,
That only once in a great while.
Emboldened by his Olga’s smile,
And with love’s sw^eet confusion dizzy,
He dares to trifle with a tress
Or kiss the hem of her dear dress.
Sometimes he reads to Olga, trying
To choose such moral tales as might 
Have passages on nature vying 
With those Chateaubriand could write;
And certain pages (fabrications,
A snare to maids’ imaginations)
He passes over in a rush
And not without a tell-tale blush.
At whiles, upon their elbow's leaning,
In grave seclusion as is fit.
Above the chess-board they will sit.
And ponder each move’s secret meaning.
Till Lensky, too absorbed to look,
With his own pawn takes his own rook.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
xxviii
If he goes home, his dreams still linger
About his Olga; it may be.
Having her album there to finger,
He decorates it earnestly:
In ink or colors he is sketching
A rustic view that she found fetching,
A tomb, a temple vowed to love,
A lyre that bears a little dove;
Or on the sheet another wrote on,
A sweet remembrance to ensure.
Below that other’s signature
He writes a verse for her to dote on —
A passing thought’s enduring trace
That time and change may not erase.
Of course you’ve often seen that treasure.
The album of a country miss,
Scrawled over by her friends at leisure
With blotted rhyme and criss-cross kiss — 
Where spelling has been sadly spited,
And an eternal friendship plighted
In hacked as well as hackneyed verse 
That could not very well be worse.
On the first page there’s this confection:
^^Qu^ecrirez-vous sur ces tablettes?^^
Beneath it: d. v. Annette”;
And on the last page this reflection:
”You are the one that I adore.
Who loves you more may write yet more.”
Here you will find as decoration
Two hearts, a torch, and flowers, be sure, 
And many a solemn protestation 
Of loves that to the grave endure;
But for my part I do not mind
Inscribing albums of this kind:
I know there’ll be a warm reception
Of any nonsense I set down,
And people later, with a frown,
Or else a smile that’s pure deception,
Will not debate and ponder it
And search my nonsense for some wit.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
But you, chance volumes that in Hades
Once graced the devil’s own abode,
XXX You tomes wherewith resplendent ladies
Torment the rhymesters a la mode.
You handsome albums decorated
By what Tolstoy’s fine brush created.
Or graced by Baratynsky’s pen,
May Heaven blast your page, amen!
When a fine lady seeks to win me 
Her well-bound quarto to inscribe,
I fain would write a diatribe —
A mocking demon stirs within me
And prompts something satirical;
But they demand a madrigal!
No smart conceits does Lensky fashion
For Olga’s album — not a bit!
XXXI His lyrics breathe a candid passion.
There is no sparkle here of wit;
Dear Olga is his only matter.
Her looks, her words — he does not flatter.
But with the living truth aglow,
His verses like a river flow.
Thus you, Yazykov, when affection
For God knows whom inspired your soul, 
Let the sonorous stanzas roll;
And your remarkable collection
Of elegies at some far date 
Will tell the story of your fate.
But hush! Our sternest critic rises
And bids us cast away the wreath 
XXXli Of elegy that he despises.
And throws this challenge in our teeth:
’’Stop crying, stop this tiresome quacking 
About the self-same thing, this clacking 
About the past, what’s done and gone; 
Enough, sing other tunes, move on!” 
’’Correct; you’ll bring for our inspection 
The classic trumpet, sword, and mask; 
You’ll bid us free, to speed our task,
The frozen funds of intellection —
Eh, friend?” But no, attend again:
’’Write odes, odes only, gentlemen,
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
xxxiv
''As in the old days poets wrote them —
That ancient glory still shines bright . ,
"What! only solemn odes? Just quote them:
They’re duller than the things we write.
Recall Dmitriyev’s castigation;
Why should you have such veneration
For all that musty rhetoric.
While our sad rhymesters earn a kick?"
"Ah, but the elegy is flighty.
Inane and petty, while the ode
Travels how different a road —
Its aim is high, its meaning mighty . .
I’ll not debate the point. Ye gods!
Why set two ages thus at odds?
Admiring glory, loving freedom,
Vladimir too had odes to write,
But seeing Olga wouldn’t read ’em.
The lovelorn boy ignored them quite.
Lives there a poet who rehearses
To his dear charmer his own verses?
They say that life does not afford
A more magnificent reward.
How blessed the lover who is granted
The chance to read his modest songs 
To her to whom his heart belongs,
And watch her, languidly enchanted!
How blessed, indeed . . . though she might choose
Something more certain to amuse.
The things that I concoct in lonely
Long hours, the melodies I mend,
I read not to the crowd, but only
To my old nurse, my childhood’s friend;
Or after dinner I may vary
The boredom: nabbing the unwary
Good neighbor who’s dropped in on me,
I choke him with a tragedy;
Or else (joking aside) while strolling
Beside my quiet lake, beset 
By tiresome rhymes and vain regret,
I frighten the wild ducks by rolling
My tuneful stanzas forth till they 
Take off, and smoothly soar away.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Four
And now what of Onegin? Truly
I fear, friends, lest your patience fail:
XXXVi His daily occupations duly
XXXVll I shall, to pleasure you, detail.
As hermits live who hope for heaven
He lived — in summer rose at seven;
And lightly clad, though airs were chill,
Walked to the stream below the hill; 
Gulnare’s bold singer emulating,
He swam this Hellespont anew,
Then dipped into some vile review.
Keeping his morning coffee waiting.
And next he dressed . . .
A book, a walk where shadows flitted
And brooklets murmured pleasantly, 
XXXVlll And, if a black-eyed girl permitted,
XXXIX Sometimes a kiss as fresh as she,
A lively horse, but not too restive,
A dinner that was rather festive.
Therewith a bottle of light wine,
And solitude — this was, in fine,
Onegin’s holy life; unheeding,
He let the summer season fly,
Nor reckoned days as they went by,
No other entertainment needing.
Forgetting friends and city ways
And tedious planned holidays.
Our northern summer, swiftly flying,
Is southern winter’s travesty;
xl And even as we are denying
Its passage, it has ceased to be.
More often now the sun was clouded;
The sky breathed autumn, somber, shrouded;
Shorter and shorter grew the days;
Sad murmurs filled the woodland ways
As the dark coverts were denuded;
Now southward swept the caravan
Of the wild geese, a noisy clan;
And mists above the meadows brooded;
A tedious season they await
Who hear November at the gate.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
The hazy dawn commences coldly.
The silent fields, abandoned, wait,
xli And on the highway marches boldly
The wolf beside his hungry mate.
The horse who scents him snorts and quivers,
The traveler observes and shivers 
And dashes uphill and is gone;
Now from the shed at crack of dawn
The herd no longer drives his cattle,
Nor calls them, noons, for mustering;
Indoors, the maid will softly sing
Above her spinning-wheel’s low rattle;
Her work the crackling matchwood lights,
The friend of wintry cottage nights.
The frosts begin to snap, and gleaming
With silver hoar, the meadows lie . . • 
xlii (The reader waits the rhyme -word: beaming.
Well, take it, since you are so sly!).
The icy river shows a luster
That fine parquet can never muster.
And on their skates the merry boys
Now cut the ice with scraping noise;
Down to the waterfront there stumbles
A clumsy goose, and thinks to put 
Into the stream her red-webbed foot,
But stepping forth she slips and tumbles;
The first gay snowflakes spin once more
And drop in stars upon the shore.
What, in the country, when it’s dreary.
Can a man do? Go walking there?
xliii This is the season eyes grow weary.
Beholding bareness everywhere.
On the bleak steppe go horseback-riding?
Yes, but your horse will soon be sliding,
His worn shoe slipping on the ice,
And he will throw you in a trice.
Stay indoors, by a book befriended?
Here’s Pradt and Scott. You do not think
You care to? Check accounts, or drink,
Till somehow the long evening’s ended,
And so the morrow passes, too —
Your winter is cut out for you.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
Onegin, like Childe Harold, scorning
All labor, took to pensive ways; 
xHv An icy bath begins his morning.
And then at home all day he stays
Alone, and sunk in calculation,
Fie finds suflScient occupation
In billiards, with a good blunt cue 
And ivory balls, not more than two.
But as the rural dusk advances
The game he can at last forget;
Beside the fire a table’s set.
He waits: and up a troika prances,
His roans bring Lensky to the door;
Come, it is time to dine once more.
The pail is brought, the ice is clinking
Round old Moet or Veuve Cliquot; 
xlv This is what poets should be drinking
And they delight to see it flow.
Like Hippocrene it sparkles brightly.
The golden bubbles rising lightly
(The image, why, of this and that:
I quote myself, and do it pat).
I could not see it without gloating,
And once I gave my meager all
To get it, friends, do you recall?
How many follies then were floating
Upon the magic of that stream —
What verse, what talk, how fair a dream!
But this bright sibilant potation
Betrays my stomach, and although 
xlvi I love it still, at the dictation
Of prudence now I drink Bordeaux.
Ay is risky, if delicious;
It’s like a mistress, gay, capricious,
Enchanting, sparkling, frivolous.
And empty — so it seems to us . . .
But you, Bordeaux, I always treasure
As a good comrade, one who shares 
Our sorrows and our smaller cares,
And also our calm hours of leisure.
One whose warm kindness has no end —
Long live Bordeaux, the faithful friend!
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
The fire is out; the ashes, shifting,
Have dimmed the golden coal; half-seen,
xlvii A thread of smoke is upward drifting;
The hearth breathes warmth, and all’s serene;
Up through the flue the pipe -smoke passes; 
Upon the table gleam the glasses,
Their rapid bubbles hissing still;
The shadows creep across the sill.
(A friendly glass, and friendly chatter
I’ve always thought well suited to 
The hour called ^^entre chien et loup^^^
The reason doesn’t really matter.)
But let us rather now inquire
What’s said beside the fading fire.
^AVell, how are the young ladies faring?
Your Olga? And Tatyana too?”
xlviii ”Pour me a little more, be sparing . . .
Hold on, old fellow, that will do . . .
The family is well; they send you
Regards. But Olga, oh, my friend, \ ou 
Should see how lovely she has grown!
Such shoulders I have never known!
And what a throat! And what a spirit! . . .
Let’s call some time. Take my advice;
You looked in at the house just twice
And never after that went near it.
But I’m a dunce! They bade me say
You are to come, and named the day.”
”1?” ”Yes, a birthday celebration —
Tatyana’s — comes next Saturday.
xlix You have her mother’s invitation
And Olenka’s. Why say them nay?”
”0h, there will be a dreadful babble,
And such a crowd, a perfect rabble . .
”No, nobody! You’re quite secure,
Only the faznily, I’m sure.
Oblige me! Is it such hard labor?”
"Agreed.” "Now that is good of you!”
He said, and found his words the cue
To drink a toast to his fair neighbor,
Then fell again to talking of
His precious Olga: such is love!
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Four
The day was set, his heart elated;
^ hen but a fortnight more had fled
I He’d greet the hour so long awaited.
The secrets of the nuptial bed;
And dreaming of his exultation
He never thought of the vexation 
That Hymen brings, the grief and pain, 
And the cool yawns that come amain. 
While we, with married life not smitten. 
Are certain that it only means 
A series of fatiguing scenes.
Such stuff as Lafontaine has written . . .
Ah, my poor Lensky, he was made 
For such a life, I am afiraid.
Beloved ... or such was his conviction,
He was in bliss. Indeed, thrice blessed 
li Is he who can believe a fiction.
Who, lulling reason, comes to rest
In the soft luxury of feeling,
Like a poor sot to shelter reeling
Or (since it’s ugly to be drunk)
An insect in a flower sunk;
But wretched is the man who never
Can be surprised, who is not stirred 
By a translated move or word,
Who cannot feel: he is too clever.
Whose heart experience has chilled,
W'hose raptures are forever stilled.
Chapter Five
BE THOU SPARED THESE FEARFUL DREAMS,
THOU, MY SWEET SVETLANA.
ZHUKOVSKY
That year was extraordinary.
The autumn seemed so loth to go;
Upon the third of January,
At last, by night, arrived the snow*
Tatyana, still an early riser,
Found a white picture to surprise her:
The courtyard white, a white parterre,
The roofs, the fence, all molded fair;
The frost-work o’er the panes was twining;
The trees in wintry silver gleamed;
And in the court gay magpies screamed;
While winter’s carpet, softly shining.
Upon the distant hills lay light.
And all she looked on glistened white.
Here’s winter! . . . The triumphant peasant
Upon his sledge tries out the road;
His mare scents snow upon the pleasant
Keen air, and trots without a goad;
The bold hihitka swiftly traces
Two fluffy furrows as it races;
The driver on his box we note
With his red belt and sheepskin coat.
A serf-boy takes his dog out sleighing,
Himself transformed into a horse;
One finger’s frostbitten, of course.
But nothing hurts when you are playing;
And at the window, not too grim.
His mother stands and threatens him.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Such vulgar scenes as these despising.
You may dismiss them as unfit
III For verse — it would not be surprising,
There’s little here that’s exquisite.
Another, at a god’s dictation.
Described with frenzied inspiration
First snow, and delicately wrote 
Of wintry pleasures; you will dote 
Upon those lines of bis commending 
The glories of these frosty days.
Like secret promenades in sleighs;
But I, my friend, am not contending
With you, nor yet with you who spin 
Fine tales about your fair young Finn.
Tanya, though she could give no reason,
Was yet a thorough Russian; hence
IV She loved the Russian winter season
And its cold white magnificence:
The hoar-frost in the sun a -shimmer.
And sleighing, and, when light grew dimmer,
The snows still gleaming softly pink,
And the long evenings black as ink.
Yuletide they duly celebrated
As custom bade; with charm and spell 
The maids would gleefully foretell 
To the young ladies what was fated.
And promised them each year again
A soldier spouse and a campaign.
Tanya with simple faith defended
The people’s lore of days gone by;
V She knew what dreams and cards portended,
And what the moon might signify.
She quaked at omens; all around her
Were signs and warnings to confound her — 
Her heart assailed, where’er she went 
By some obscure presentiment.
Upon the stove the cat elected
To wash his face with careful paw,
And purr the while: Tatyana saw
At once that guests might be expected.
If on the left she would espy
A slender crescent riding high.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Her face would pale, her body quivered.
And when a star dropped down the sky
VI And into golden fragments shivered.
She’d watch its flight with anxious eye.
And hurriedly before it perished
Confide to it the wish she cherished.
If she encountered, unaware,
A black-firocked monk, or if a hare
Should cross her path while she was walking, 
She would go stumbling down the road.
In dread of what this might forebode;
She fancied ghosts behind her stalking.
And terror-stricken would await
The blow of a malignant fate.
And yet she found it no affliction —
Her terror held a secret charm:
Vll Since nature, fond of contradiction,
Allows a zest to oinr alarm.
Now Yule-tide brings its fun and folly.
The young tell fortimes, all are jolly.
For carefree youth knows no regret.
Life’s vista gleams before it yet.
The aged, at the grave’s grim portal.
Through spectacles, with failing eyes,
Tell fortunes, too, but otherwise:
The joys they knew have all proved mortal.
No matter: lisping like a child,
Hope lies to them, and they’re beguiled.
Tatyana stares in fascination,
Seeing the molten wax assume
Vlll A shape wherein imagination
Prefigures joy to come, or doom;
Now from the dish where they are lying
The rings are plucked; each maiden, sighing, 
Seeks omens in the song they sing;
This ditty sounds for Tanya’s ring:
’^There peasants, rich beyond all measure.
Can shovel silver with a spade;
We sing about a lucky maid.
For glory will be hers, and treasure!”
The tune, however, threatens her;
Pussy is what the girls prefer.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
A frosty slight; the heavens muster
A starry host of choiring spheres 
IX That shine with an harmonious luster . , »
Tatyana in the court appears,
And, careless of the cold, is training
A mirror on the moon, now waning;
The image trembling in the glass
Is but the wistful moon’s, alas! . , «
The crunch of snow . , « a step approaches;
Straight to the stranger Tanya speeds,
Her tender voice is like a reed’s.
And rash the question that she broaches:
’’Your name is — what?” He passes on.
But first he answers: ’’Agafon.”
Tanya prepared for fortune- telling
As her good nurse w^ould have her do:
X And in the bath-house, not the dwelling.
They set a table laid for two;
But she took fright, our shy Tatyana;
I, too, recalling poor Svetlana,
As suddenly grew timorous,
So fortune-telling’s not for us.
Tanya, her silken belt untying,
Undressed at last and went to bed.
Sweet Lei now hovers o’er her head.
And one may find a mirror lying
Beneath her pillow. Darkness keeps 
All secrets safe. Tatyana sleeps.
She dreams. And wonders are appearing
Before her now, without a doubt:
XI She walks across a snowy clearing,
There’s gloom and darkness all about;
Amid the snowdrifts, seething, roaring,
A torrent gray with foam is pouring;
Darkly it rushes on amain,
A thing the winter could not chain;
By a slim icicle united.
Two slender boughs are flung across
The waters, where they boil and toss;
And by this shaking bridge affrighted,
The helpless girl can do no more
Than halt bewildered on the shore.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
She chides the waters that impede her^
But naught avails her girlish wrath;
XU No helping hand is near to lead her
Across in safety to the path;
A snowdrift stirs, it falls asunder:
Just fancy who appears from under!
A shaggy bear! At Tanya’s cry
The creature bellows in reply 
As his repellent aid he proffers;
The frightened maiden gathers strength
And puts her little hand at length 
Upon the sharp -clawed paw he offers,
And steps across; her Mood congeals;
The bear is marching at her heels.
Look back she dare not; fear would blind her;
She hurries, but the dreadful shape
XIII Of her rough lackey is behind her,
In vain she struggles to escape;
Forward, with groan and grunt he lunges,
And into the deep forest plunges;
In still and somber beauty stand
The pines, their boughs on every hand 
Tufted with snow; the stars are shining 
Through lofty tree-tops everywhere;
Birch, linden, aspen, all are bare;
The road is lost and past divining.
The rapids and the underbrush
Deep drifted in the snowy hush.
Into the woods, pursued, she presses;
The snow is reaching to her knee;
XIV A branch leans down to snare her tresses,
To scratch her neck, and stubbornly
Plucks at the ear-rings she is wearing,
Her trinkets rudely from her tearing;
Her small wet slipper’s next to go.
All covered with the brittle snow;
She drops her handkerchief, and shivers,
Afraid to stop: the bear is near;
She dare not lift, for shame and fear.
Her trailing skirt, with hand that quivers;
She runs, he follows on and on;
She can no more, her strength is gone*
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
She falls into the snow; alertly
The shaggy monster seizes her,
XV And in his arms she lies inertly,
She does not breathe, she does not stir;
Along the forest path he crashes.
And to a humble cottage dashes:
Crowding, the trees about it grow,
And it is weighted down with snow;
One window glimmers bright and rosy.
Within, a noisy clatter swells;
The bear says: '^Here my gossip dwells.
Come warm yourself where it is cozy;” 
And doing with her as he will.
He lays her down upon the sill.
Recovered, Tanya, pale and shrinking,
Looks round: the bear is gone, at least; 
XVI She hears wild shouts and glasses clinking
As at a mighty funeral feast;
The noise is queer and terrifying.
With caution through the key -hole spying
She sees . . . Why, who would credit it? 
About the table monsters sit!
One is a horned and dog-faced creature,
One has a cock’s head plain to see,
And there’s a witch with a goatee,
A dwarf, whose tail is quite a feature,
A haughty skeleton, and that
Is half a crane and half a cat.
More horrors: here a lobster riding
A spider; here a red-capped skull 
XVll A goose’s snaky neck bestriding —
Most fearful and most wonderful!
A wind -mill all alone is whirling.
Its wings with crazy motions twirling;
They bark and whistle, sing and screech. 
To horse’s stamp and human speech!
And in the crowd that filled the hovel,
Aghast, Tatyana recognized
The dreaded one, the dearly prized:
The very hero of our novel!
Onegin sits and drinks a health,
And glances at the door by stealth.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
xix
His slightest move is overawing;
He drinks: with greedy howls they swill;
He laughs, and they are all guffawing;
He frowns, and everyone is still;
It’s plain that here he is the master.
No longer fearful of disaster.
But curious, as maidens are,
Tatyana sets the door ajar . . .
A sudden gust of wind surprises
The crowd of house-sprites, blowing out 
The lights, bewildering the rout;
With flashing eyes Onegin rises
And scrapes his chair along the floor;
All rise; he marches to the door.
Consumed with terror, Tanya, quaking,
Would fly the place: she cannot stir;
For all the efforts she is making.
No single sound escapes from her;
Eugene flings wide the door: defenseless.
The poor girl stands there, almost senseless;
She hears the raucous laughter swell 
And sees the gaping fiends of hell:
The horns and hoofs, the whiskered faces,
The tails and tusks and bloody jaws.
The crooked trunks, the gleaming claw^s.
The bony hands, the sly grimaces;
All point to her, and all combine
In shouting fiercely: ^^Mine! She’s mine!”
”She’s mine!” cries Eugene, stern and daring;
They vanish, claimed by the unknown;
The chilly dark the girl is sharing
With Eugene, and with him alone.
His gentle touch nowise dismays her.
As on a shaky bench he lays her.
And on her shoulder leans his head;
When suddenly they’re visited
By Lensky and his love; light flashes;
Eugene berates them, rolls his eyes.
And lifts his hand as who defies
Unbidden guests; the scene abashes 
Tatyana, and with failing breath.
The maiden lies there, pale as death.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
The quarrel grows; Onegin quickly
Leaps for a knife, and Lensky falls;
XXI The fearful shadows gather thickly;
A horrid shout assails the walls
And leaves the little hovel shaking , . . 
Tatyana, terror-struck, is waking . . »
Her dear familiar room shows plain,
And through the frosty window-pane
The dawn shines ruddy; Olga rushes 
In to her sister, swallow-light;
Her rosy cheeks are not less bright
Than in the north Aurora’s blushes.
'^'^Tell me your dream,” all breathlessly
She cries: ^'Whom, Tanya, did you see?”
But, every interruption spurning,
She lies as though she has not heard,
XXll Her book in hand, and slowly turning
Page after page, says not a word.
Although her book has no pretensions
To holding poets’ sweet inventions.
Deep truths, or well-drawn scenes — yet not
Racine or Virgil, Walter Scott,
Or Seneca’s, or Byron’s pages,
Or Fashion Journal, could enthrall
As did this author: chief of all 
Diviners and Chaldean sages.
This Martin Zadeka, it seems,
Was the interpreter of dreams.
It happened that a peddler tendered
This learned opus one fine day 
XXlll To Tanya, and therewith surrendered
A prize that chanced to come his way:
Malvine — because the set was broken 
Three-fifty was the price bespoken,
And in exchange he took as well
Volume the third of Marmontel,
Two Petriads, and a collection
Of fables, and a grammar too.
She thumbed her Martin till he knew
No rival in the girl’s affection . , .
He offered solace and delight,
And slept beside her every night.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Five
XXV
The dream alarms her, and not knowing
What hidden meaning in it lies.
She searches for a passage showing
What such a nightmare signifieso 
Some clue the index may afford her. 
Where, set in alphabetic order.
She finds; abyss, ape, bear, bridge, cave,
Dirk, door, eclipse, fir, ghost, ice, knave, 
Etcetera. The glosses vex her.
Her growing doubts they cannot still.
She fears the dream bodes only ill.
And yet the auguries perplex her.
The dream pervades her mournful moods.
And so for days poor Tanya broods.
But lo! from out the morning valley
The rosy dawn brings forth the sun,
And with good cheer and merry sally
The name-day feast is soon begun.
The guests are early in arriving.
Whole families of neighbors driving
Up to the steps, in coach and shay, 
Calash^ kibitka, crowded sleigh.
The hall is packed to suffocation,
The parlor’s crowded; barking pugs,
And girls who kiss with laughs and hugs,
Increase the din of celebration;
Guests bow and scrape within the door.
And nurses scream and children roar.
Beside his wife, that chubby charmer.
Plump Pustyakov strides heavily;
Here comes Gvozdin, a first-rate farmer
Whose peasants live in beggary;
The two Skotinins, gray as sages.
Line up with children of all ages:
From two to thirty, in a row;
Here’s Petushkov, a rural beau;
My cousin, sleepy-eyed Buyanov,
Fluff in his hair, with visored cap
(I’m certain that you know the chap), 
The old fat counsellor, Flyanov,
A gossip, glutton, clown, and cheat,
Who likes a bribe as much as meat.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
xxviii
Among the crush of people passes,
Leading his offspring, Kharlikov;
With them, a red-wigged man in glasses:
The wit Triquet, late of Tambov.
His pocket burns: it holds a treasure,
A song he brings for Tanya’s pleasure.
All children know the melody:
Reveillez-vous^ belle endormie.
The verses came — but who would know it? —
From a moth-eaten almanac;
He rescued them, and with the knack
That argues a resourceful poet,
Eliminated belle Nina,
Inserting: belle Tatiana.
Behold! from town arrives — what rapture!
The company commander, whom 
Each rural mother hopes to capture.
The idol of all maids in bloom.
His news sets girlish hearts to drumming:
A regimental band is coming!
The colonel’s sending it. A ball!
Upon each other’s necks they fall.
Anticipating this distraction.
But dinner’s served, and arm in arm
The couples to the table swarm;
Tanya’s the center of attraction.
They cross themselves, their heads incline,
Then buzzing, all sit down to dine.
Awhile all conversation ceases;
They chew. The pleasant prandial chink
Of plates and silverware increases,
The touching glasses chime and clink.
The feast goes on, but soon thereafter
The room grows loud with talk and laughter, 
And none can hear his neighbor speak.
They chortle, argue, shout and squeak.
And while they all are in high feather,
The door swings wide, and Lensky’s here,
Onegin too. '"^At last, oh, dear!”
The hostess cries. Guests squeeze together,
Move plates and chairs with ready glee,
And seat the two friends hastily.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
They face Tatyana, who is paler
Than is the moon one sees at dawn;
XXX With the emotions that assail her
She trembles like a hunted fawn;
Her darkening eyes she never raises;
With stormy passion’s heat she blazes;
She suffocates; she scarcely hears
The two friends’ greetings; and the tears 
Are all but flowing; her heart flutters,
The poor thing nearly swoons; she’s ill.
But now her reason and her will 
Prevail. Two words she softly mutters, 
And that between her teeth, to greet 
These guests, and somehow keeps her seat.
Eugene had long abominated
High tragedy and swoons and tears,
XXXI And girlish fits of nerves he hated:
He’d suffered j&rom such things for years.
The feast he was quite unprepared for, 
’Twas not the sort of thing he cared for; 
And having noted, in a pet.
That poor Tatyana was upset.
He dropped his eyes in irritation
And sulked, and swore that he would trim
His friend for thus misleading him;
Now soothed by this anticipation.
He set his mind to work with zest.
Caricaturing every guest.
Eugene was not alone in noting
Tatyana’s trouble; but each eye 
XXXll Was at that moment busy gloating
Upon a succulent fat pie
(Alas, too salty), and observing 
A pitch-sealed bottle they were serving 
As a fit sequel to the roast:
Wine of the Don, to drink a toast.
And then appeared a row of glasses.
Each long and narrow as your waist,
Zizi, that asks to be embraced;
My soul’s fair crystal, what surpasses
Your charm? My verses sang your praise; 
You made me drunk in other days.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
xxxiv
Released j&:om the damp cork, the bottle
Pops; the wine fizzes; and Triquet,
Whom silence was about to throttle,
With dignity brings forth his lay.
The gathering, affected by it
Before it’s heard, is grave and quiet.
Tatyana, breathless, caimot stir;
Triquet turns, with his sheet, to her,
And sings, off key. The song is greeted
With shouts and plaudits. Tanya now 
Is forced to curtsey, to his bow.
Though great, the poet’s not conceited.
His toast rings out the first of all,
Then he presents the madrigal.
All greeted and congratulated
Tatyana, who spoke each one fair;
Eugene, as he his turn awaited.
Observed the girl’s embarrassed air.
Her sad fatigue, her helpless languor.
And pity took the place of anger.
He bowed to her without a word.
But somehow his mere look averred
Deep tenderness; perhaps he meant it.
Or else he may, dehberately.
Have played a prank in coquetry.
Or somehow couldn’t quite prevent it.
But tenderness his look did show.
And Tanya’s heart began to glow.
The chairs shoved backward scrape the flooring;
All crowd into the drawing-room 
Like bees that from the hive are pouring 
Into a meadow sweet with bloom.
The feast makes every move a labor.
And neighbor wheezes unto neighbor.
The ladies sit beside the fire;
The girls, off by themselves, conspire;
Green tables are set up, alluring
The gamblers, worthy men and bold:
Ombre and Boston claim the old,
And more play whist, whose fame’s enduring —
Games kindred in monotony.
All greedy boredom’s progeny.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
xxxvii
txxviii
The whist -players are Hon-hearted:
They’ve played eight rubbers at a stretch.
Eight times changed places since they started; 
They stop because the servants fetch 
The tea. I note the hour, or nearly,
By dinner, tea, and supper merely.
Off in the cotmtry we can say
What time it is with no Breguet 
Except the stomach; I may mention 
In passing that my stanzas speak 
Of feasts and sundry foods and eke 
Of corks, with much the same attention 
That to such matters Homer pays.
Who’s had three thousand years of praise.
But here is tea: the girls demurely
Their steaming cups have barely stirred 
When sweetly through the doors and surely 
Bassoon and flute at once are heard.
Because the tune is so diverting,
His cup of tea with rum deserting,
The local Paris: Petushkov,
Comes up to carry Olga off.
And Lensky — Tanya; Kharlikova,
A virgin of ripe years, accepts
Triquet; next follow two adepts:
Buyanov leads off Pustyakova;
The ball-room summons one and all.
Thus brilliantly begins the ball.
At the commencement of my story
I thought to paint (see Chapter One)
A northern ball in all its glory,
A thing Albani might have done;
But yielding to a dream’s distraction,
I reminisced of the attraction
That ladies’ feet have had for me.
Oh, I have erred sufficiently
In tracking you! I should be moving 
On other paths, since youth is spent,
And grow, with time, intelligent.
My style and my affairs improving.
And, if my novel is to thrive.
Free from digressions Chapter Five.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
Like giddy youth forever swirling
In dizzy circles round and round, 
xli The waltz sends tireless couples twirling
To flute and viol’s merry sound.
Revenge approaches, so, concealing
A smile, Onegin is appealing 
To Olga. First they spin about.
Then he suggests they sit one out.
And chats of this and that politely;
A moment, and the pair once more
Are waltzing round the dancing-floor.
All wonder whether they see rightly;
And staring in dismayed surprise,
Lensky can scarcely trust his eyes.
Now the mazurka’s strains are sounding.
Of old the ballroom used to shake 
xlii To the mazurka; with the pounding
Of heels the stout parquet would quake,
And window -sashes rattled loudly.
Not now: we, like the ladies, proudly
And smoothly glide on polished boards; 
But the provincial town affords 
A place for the old-fashioned splendor: 
The leaps, the heels, the whiskers fair. 
Are just the same as what they were; 
The country to the past is tender.
Nor bends to fashion’s tyrannies:
The modern Russian’s worst disease.
My lively cousin now advancing.
Presents the charming sisters both 
To Eugene, who at once goes dancing 
Away with Olga, nothing loth;
He leads her, nonchalantly gliding.
And in an attitude confiding,
His head above her fondly bent,
Whispers an outworn compliment,
And presses her soft hand — elation
Inflames the girl’s conceited face;
My Lensky’s fury grows apace;
He waits with jealous indignation
The end of the mazurka, and 
For the cotillion begs her hand.
xliv
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Five
She cannot. No? But why? She’s given
Onegin the cotillion. Lord!
xlv What does he hear? She dared . . . He’s driven
To think the girl that he adored
Is but a flirt. Though she is barely 
Out of her swaddling-clothes, she’s fairly 
Accomplished as a vile coquette!
Such treachery who could forget?
Poor Lensky cannot bear his sorrow.
He curses women’s whim with force.
Goes out at once, demands a horse.
And dashes off. Before the morrow
A brace of pistols and two balls 
Will square accounts, whoever falls.
Chapter Six
LA SOTTO WORM NUBIiOSI E BREVI
NASCE UNA GENTE A CUI L’MORIR NON DOLE.
PETRARCH
Revenge was something of a pleasure,
But Eugene, now his friend was gone, 
Was bored again beyond all measure; 
Olenka too began to yawn,
By her dull partner’s mood infected;
And as she looked about, dejected, 
For Lensky, the cotillion seemed 
To her a tiresome thing she dreamed. 
It’s over. Having supped, the gentry 
Are glad at last to take a rest:
A place is found for every guest
’Twixt the maid’s attic and the entry. 
And gratefully to bed they creep; 
Eugene alone goes home to sleep.
All’s hushed: within the parlor, sighing
And snoring, heavy Pustyakov 
Beside his heavy mate is lying.
Gvozdin, Buyanov, Petushkov,
And Flyanov, somewhat ill, encumber
The dining-room: on chairs they slumber. 
Upon the floor Triquet we view 
In flannels and a night-cap too.
The girls with Olga and Tatyana
Are settled: they are fast asleep;
But at her window, fain to weep.
Poor Tanya, lighted by Diana,
Stares out upon the shadowed lea:
There is no sleep for such as she.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Once more Tatyana’s heart is drumming;
Delight is mingled with distress
III As she reviews Onegin’s coming
And his brief look of tenderness —
And then, with Olga, how he acted!
She puzzles till she is distracted,
And jealous longing frets the maid —
As though a chiQy hand were laid
Upon her heart, as though a rumbling 
Black chasm were gaping at her feet . . . 
”But ruin at his hands is sweet,”
Says Tanya, ^'Nay, I am not grumbling:
Complaint will make my pain no less.
He cannot give me happiness.”
Proceed, my tale! Here’s matter for ye,
Good readers: a new face arrives.
IV Five versts away from Krasnogorye,
Our Lensky’s village, lives and thrives,
’Mongst thinkers who are few and cloudy, 
Zaretzky, once a jolly rowdy,
A gambler who won all the stakes,
A tavern tribune, chief of rakes.
But now a kind and simple father,
Albeit still a bachelor,
A good landed proprietor,
A friend in need, as you will gather —
Even a man of honor: thus
The times improve, and better us!
Time was when all the world was vying
In praises of his hardihood;
V He hit an ace, there’s no denying,
At fifteen feet: his aim was good.
One day when leading his battalion.
He fell from off a Kalmuck stallion.
Drunk as an owl, into a trench.
And so was captured by the French —
A precious pledge! The man was guided
By honor’s dictates, was indeed 
A modern Regulus; at need 
He’d suffer bonds again, provided 
That at Very’s on credit he 
Could drain each morning bottles three.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
He well knew how to set you laughing.
Made game of fools, and being bent 
VI On secret or on open chaffing.
Could hoodwink the inteUigent;
Though on occasion hke a duffer
This clever jester had to suffer.
And for the pranks he liked to play
Took punishment once in a way.
He Hked debate, and sometimes rudely
And sometimes neatly made retort.
And shrewdly held his peace; in sport
Would start a quarrel quite as shrewdly, 
To have two friends at daggers drawn 
And send them, armed, from Led at dawn,
Or into concord gently shame them.
To earn a luncheon from the two,
Vll And later privately defame them
With a gay jest and words untrue.
Sed alia temporal Such jolly
Pranks (like love’s dream, another folly)
Belong to youth, with youth are fled.
And my Zaretzky, as I said,
Beneath the shade of his acacias
Has found a refuge from the blast 
And lives like a true sage at last,
Plants cabbages like old Horatius,
And raises fowls, while at his knee
The children learn their A-B-C.
He was no fool; and Eugene, ready
To praise his mind if not his heart,
Vlll Admired his judgment, always steady.
And found his comments sane and smart.
He often paid a call, surmising 
A welcome; it was not surprising 
For Eugene to behold him there 
That morning, gay and debonair.
He barely spoke; his urgent mission
Zaretzky was not one to shirk —
At once he offered with a smirk
A note of Lensky’s composition;
Onegin took the letter to
The window, where he read it through.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
The poet, swift in thought and action,
With most polite and cool address,
IX Herein demanded satisfaction.
For honor could require no less.
The messenger was not kept waiting:
Onegin without hesitating
Replied as though he little cared 
What came of it: Always prepared.”
On hearing this, Zaretzky started
To go: he had no wish to stay.
And he was busy anyway.
And so without more words, departed;
But left alone, Onegin sighed.
With his own self dissatisfied.
And rightly: for Onegin, sitting
In judgment on himself could be 
X Severe, and he was not acquitting
Himself, even in privacy.
First: he accused himself of mocking
Young timid love, and that was shocking. 
Second: the poet was a fool.
But at eighteen that is the rule;
And holding him in such affection
Eugene should not have been so rash.
Not thus have sought to cut a dash.
Nor shown a fighter’s predilection.
But, like a man of worth and sense,
Have acted with intelligence.
Had he been quicker in revealing —
Instead of bristling at the start —
XI That he was yet a man of feeling.
He’d have disarmed the youthful heart.
”Too late,” he thinks. ”And then that vicious
Old duelist can be malicious:
He thrust his nose in right away.
And he would have a deal to say . . .
Of course, one should reward his gabble
With scorn; yet smiles upon the lips 
Of fools, and slyly whispered quips ...”
Lo! the opinion of the rabble
Is honor’s mainspring. I’ll be bound —
The thing that makes the world go round.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Six
The poet, with impatience burning.
Sits home, awaiting the reply;
Xll And here the gossip is returning
With solemn gait and sparkling eye.
The young Othello is delighted!
He feared that he had not incited
The rogue, who somehow would escape 
By a sly dodge or ready jape.
He savors the few words that settle
His doubts: for meet they surely will 
At dawn tomorrow, near the mill;
Then let each man be on his mettle:
They’ll cock the trigger and let fly,
Their mark the temple or the thigh.
Each hour of torment added fuel
To Lensky’s wrath: he would not see
XIII The base coquette before the duel;
He marked the time, and presently
He waved his hand, as one who’d rue it
And was at Olga’s ere he knew it!
He was convinced the fickle fair
Would be dismayed to see him there;
But no! — straight down the steps to meet him
Unhesitatingly she ran.
Bewildering the wretched man.
And turned a joyful face to greet him
In the same carefree lively way 
As upon any other day.
^'Why did you leave,” the maiden asked him,
^'So very early yesterday?”
XIV Deeply disturbed as thus she tasked him.
Poor Lensky scarce knew what to say.
His jealousy and his vexation
Were banished by her animation,
Her look, so candid and serene.
Her sweet simplicity of mien! . . .
He gazes, and his heart is riven:
She loves him still; and in remorse,
He now repents him of the course
He took, and fain would be forgiven;
He trembles, cannot say a word,
His heart leaps up, his soul is stirred.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
In Olga’s presence poor Vladimir
Ignores what happened yesterday,
XV And, full of grief, the wistful dreamer
XVI Broods over all he dare not say:
XVil ''From threatened ruin I’ll retrieve her,
I shall not suffer the deceiver
To tempt with tender word and sigh
The youthful heart; I will defy
The poisonous vUe worm that mumbles
The lily -stem, and withers so
The bud that just begins to blow.
But ere ’tis open, fades and crumbles.”
These proud reflections all portend:
I’ll have a duel with my friend.
Had he but known the wounding sorrow
That burdened my Tatyana’s heart! 
XVlll Had Tanya known that on the morrow
Fresh grief would cause a keener smart —
Could she but have foreseen the meeting 
And the two friends for death competing, 
She then, as love has power to do,
Might have united them anew!
But none as yet came near divining
Her passion, not by chance or skill; 
Eugene was apt at keeping still;
In secret Tanya was repining;
The nurse alone might well have guessed,
But she was slow of wit at best.
All evening Lensky was distracted,
A glum, and next a merry man;
XIX But nurselings of the Muse have acted
Like this since first the world began;
With frowning brow he would be sitting 
At the spinet, then swiftly quitting 
The music, he would whisper low 
To Olga: "I am happy— no?”
But it is late, he should be leaving;
His heart is all but crushed with pain,
And as he says farewell again 
He feels that it must break with grieving. 
She looks at him in some dismay.
"What ails you?” "Nothing.” So — away.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
At home his pistols claimed attention;
He looked them over, boxed them right,
XX Undressed, and opened — ^need I mention? —
Schiller, of course, by candle-light.
But ever sadder, ever fonder.
He has a single thought to ponder:
He seems to see his Olga there
Unutterably dear and fair.
Inspired by tender melancholy,
Vladimir shuts the book, and then
There pours in torrents from his pen 
Verse full of amatory foUy,
Which he declaims with ecstasy
Like Delwig drunk in company.
By chance, these verses have not perished;
I have them here for you to see:
XXI ^^Oh, golden days, my springtide cherished.
Ah, whither, whither did you flee?
The day to come, what is it bearing?
In vain into the darkness staring
I try to glimpse it; but I trust 
The law of Fate is ever just.
From the drawn bow the arrow leaping
May pass me by or pierce me through;
Yet all is well — each has its due:
The hour for waking and for sleeping;
The day of busy cares is blessed.
And blessed the darkness bringing rest.
"The ray of dawn will shine tomorrow,
And day will brighten wold and wave,
XXll When I, mayhap, past joy and sorrow.
Shall know the secrets of the grave,
And Lethe’s sluggish tide will swallow
The poet, and the world will follow 
His course no more; but, oh, most dear,
Will you not come to shed a tear
Upon the urn, and think: Til -fated!
He loved me, and the dawn of life
With its unseasonable strife 
To me alone he dedicated! . . .’?
Dear friend, before this heart is nmnb —
Your spouse awaits; come to me, come! . . .”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
xxiv
His strain was languid, dark (romantic
We call it — if no trace I find 
Of such a manner, I’m pedantic.
And how it strikes me, never mind).
The poet did not think of stopping
Until, near dawn, his head was dropping 
Upon ''ideal” — modish word —
And sleep at last her boon conferred;
But scarce did consciousness forsake him
When into the hushed study came 
His neighbor, calling out his name,
Not hesitating to awake him.
''Get up,” he cried, "Past six, I vow,
Onegin’s waiting for us now.”
He erred; for Eugene, hardy sinner.
Was sleeping, heedless of the clock;
The shades of night are growing thinner.
And Lucifer’s hailed by the cock;
Onegin sleeps and does not worry.
The sun appears, a brief snow-flurry
Is gaily whirling overhead,
And still our Eugene lies abed
In cosy comfort, sleeping sweetly.
At last he rouses, opens wide
His drowsy eyes, and draws aside 
The bed-curtains; awake completely,
He marks the hour with some dismay:
He must be off without delay.
Responding to his hasty ringing.
In runs his valet, prompt Guillot,
His dressing-gown and slippers bringing,
And hands him linen white as snow.
With utmost speed Onegin dresses,
And bids his servant, since time presses,
Prepare with him to leave the place 
At once, and bear the weapon -case.
The sledge awaits. He does not tarry:
He’s in, and flying to the mill.
They come. Quite unaffected still.
He gives his man the arms to carry
(Lepage’s work), and has him tie 
The horses to an oak near by.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Upon the dam leaned Lensky, waiting.
The while Zaretzky with a sneer
XXVI Upon the mill-stone dissertating
Was quite the rustic engineer.
Onegin comes, apologizing.
Zaretzky, not at all disguising
Surprise, asks: ''Where’s your second, pray?”
A classicist in such a fray.
And sentimentally devoted
To method, he would not allow 
That one be potted anyhow,
But by rule only, and he doted
Upon the good old-fashioned ways 
(A bias worthy of our praise).
''My second?” Eugene said, "Permit me;
My worthy friend. Monsieur Guillot.
XXVll If fault there be, you will acquit me
Of making such a choice, I know;
He is, though not renowned or quoted,
An honest fellow, be it noted.”
Zaretzky bit his lip, quite vexed;
Onegin turned to Lensky next:
"Well, shall we start?” The young Othello
Responded: "Why should we delay?”
Behind the mill they went straightway.
Zaretzky and the honest fellow 
Went off and talked in solemn wise;
The foes stood by, with downcast eyes.
The foes! How long had they been parted
By this most black and vengeful mood? 
:XVlll How long since they were happy-hearted,
And sharing leisure, thoughts, and food,
And doings, in a friendly fashion?
But now, the prey of evil passion,
Like those whom an old feud inflames.
As in a nightmare each one aims
At slaughter, with a heart of leather . . .
Were it not better, if before
Those gentle hands were stained with gore
A laugh would bring the pair together?
But worldly quarrels breed the dread
Of worldly scorn, and thus are fed.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
The pistols gleam, held straight and steady;
The hammers on the ramrods knock;
The bullets are crammed down already;
One hears the clicking of a cock.
Into the pan the powder’s sifted,
The jagged flint still harmless, lifted.
Behind a stump among the trees
Guillot is standing, ill at ease.
Their gestmes marked by firm decision,
The enemies their mantles doff.
And now Zaretzky measures off
Thirty -two paces with precision;
At either end the two friends stand.
Each with a weapon in his hand.
Approach!” How calm and cold their faces.
As the two foes, with even tread.
Not aiming yet, advance four paces.
Four steps toward a narrow bed.
First Eugene, still advancing duly.
Begins to raise his pistol coolly.
Now five steps more the pair have made.
And Lensky, firm and unafraid.
Screws up his eye and is preparing
To take aim also — ^but just then 
Onegin fires . . . oh, hapless men.
Such is the guerdon of your daring!
The fatal hour is past recall;
The poet lets his pistol fall.
His hand upon his breast lays lightly.
And drops. His clouded eyes betray
Not pain, but death. Thus, sparkling whitely
Where the quick sunbeams on it play,
A snowball down the hill goes tumbling
And sinks from sight, soon to be crumbling. 
Onegin, frozen with despair.
Runs to the poor youth lying there.
And looks, and calls him . . . But no power
Avails to rouse him: he is gone.
The poet in the very dawn
Of life has perished like a flower 
That by a sudden storm was drenched;
Alas! the altar-fire is quenched.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
He did not stir, but like one dreaming
He lay most strangely there at rest.
XXXll The blood from the fresh wound was steaming;
The ball had pierced clean through the breast.
A moment since, this heart was quickened 
By poetry and love, or sickened 
By hate and dread, and strongly beat 
With dancing blood, with living heat.
But now, ’tis as a house forsaken.
Where all is silent, dark and drear.
The shutters closed, the windows blear
With chalk. No knock can ever waken 
The lady of the house: she’s fled —
Where to, God knows; she never said.
’Tis pleasant with a wicked sally
To make a man feel like an ass,
XXXlll To see him, baited, turn and rally.
And glance, unwilling, in the glass.
Ashamed to own his every feature;
’Tis yet more pleasant if the creature
Should howl absurdly: ^It is I!”
And yet more pleasant, on the sly
To make his noble coflSn ready:
A proper distance to allow,
Then, aiming at his pallid brow.
To hold the pistol straight and steady;
But yet the pleasure’s dulled if he
Is launched into eternity.
Suppose your pistol-shot has ended
A comrade’s promising career,
XXXIV One who, by a rash glance offended.
Or by an accidental sneer.
During a drunken conversation
Or in a fit of blind vexation
Was bold enough to challenge you —
Will not your soul be filled with rue
When on the ground you see him, stricken. 
Upon his brow the mark of death,
And watch the failing of his breath,
And know that heart will never quicken?
Say, now, my friend, what will you feel
When he lies deaf to your appeal?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
xxxvi
Onegin grips his pistol tightly,
His heart with sore repentance filled.
Beholding Lensky. ^^Well?” Forthrightly
The neighbor now declares: ''He’s killed.”
He’s killed! The fearful affirmation
Makes Eugene quake with consternation.
He calls for help, in misery;
And in the sleigh most carefully
The frozen corpse Zaretzky places.
To take the awful cargo home.
The horses scent the dead, and foam
Is slobbered over bit and traces.
As, sped like arrows from the bow.
They gallop snorting o’er the snow.
Friends, for the poet you are grieving,
Cut off before his hopes could bloom;
The world of glory thus bereaving,
He came, unripe, unto the tomb!
Where is the burning agitation.
Where is the noble aspiration.
The thoughts of youth so high and grave.
The tender feelings and the brave?
Where are the storms of love and longing.
The thirst for knowledge, toil, and fame.
The dread of vice, the fear of shame.
And you, bright phantoms round him thronging,
You, figments of sweet reverie.
You, dreams of sacred poesy?
Mayhap he would have been reputed.
Or gloriously served the world;
Mayhap the lyre so early muted
Beneath his fingers would have hurled 
A mighty music down the ages.
Perchance he would have earned the wages
By worldly approbation paid.
Or it may be his martyred shade
Bore to the grave to sleep forever 
A holy secret, and a voice 
To make the soul of man rejoice 
Is lost to us, and he shall never 
Be thrilled upon Elysian ways 
To hear a people’s hymn of praise.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
Perchance a humble lot awaited
The poet, and he may, forsooth,
XXXVlll Like many others have been fated
XXxix To lose his ardor with his youth.
He might have altered and deserted
The Muse — to marriage been converted.
And worn in comfort, far from town.
Horns and a quilted dressing-gown;
He might have learned that life was shabby
At bottom, and, too bored to think.
Have been content to eat and drink,
Had gout at forty, fat and flabby;
He might have gone to bed and died
While doctors hemmed and women cried.
Whate’er was to befall Vladimir,
One thought must fill your heart with pain:
xl The lover, poet, pensive dreamer,
Alas! by a friend’s hand was slain.
There is the spot if you would know it:
Left of the village where the poet
Once dwelt, two pines are intertwined —
Below you see the river wind
That waters well the nearby valley.
The women mowing oft repair
To plunge their tinkling pitchers there,
And there the weary ploughmen dally.
Beside that stream with shadows laced
A simple monument is placed.
Near by (when springtime rains have peppered
The fields with droplets once again), 
xli Weaving his shoe of bast, the shepherd
Sings of the Volga fishermen;
And the young city miss who’s facing
A summer in the country, racing 
Across the meadowland alone,
Will halt her horse beside the stone,
Tug at the leather rein, and turning
Her gauzy veil aside to see 
The simple lines there graven, she 
Will feel her heart with pity burning.
And as she reads, the tears will rise
To mist her wide and tender eyes.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
And plunged in sorry thought, more slowly
On through the field the girl will ride, 
xlii The while her wistful spirit wholly
With Lensky’s fate is occupied;
^'And what of Olga?” is her query:
”Was all her life thereafter dreary?
Or was the time of sorrow brief?
Where did her sister take her grief?
Where is the saturnine betrayer,
The smart coquettes’ smart enemy,
The exile from society
Who was the fair young poet’s slayer?”
In time, my readers, you shall hear
It all, in detail, never fear.
Not now. I love my hero truly.
And shall return to him, I vow,
xliii All his concerns recounting duly.
But that is not my pleasure now.
The years to rugged prose constrain me.
No more can hoyden rhymes detain me,
And I admit, in penitence,
I court the Muse with indolence.
No more I find it quite so pressing
To soil the sheets with flying quill;
But other fancies, dark and chill.
And other cares, severe, distressing,
In festive crowds, in solitude.
Upon my dreaming soul intrude.
By new desires I am enchanted.
New sorrows come, my heart to fret;
xliv The hopes of old will not be granted.
The olden sorrows I regret.
Ah, dreams! where has your sweetness vanished?
Where’s youth (the rhyme comes glibly) banished? 
And is the vernal crown of youth 
Quite withered now in very truth?
Can the sad thought with which I flirted
In elegiac mood, at last 
Be fact, and can my spring be past 
(As I in jest so oft asserted)?
Will it no more return to me?
Shall I be thirty presently?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Six
The afternoon of life is starting,
I must admit the sorry truth,
xlv Amen: but Jfriendly be our parting.
My frivolous and merry youth!
My thanks for all the hours of gladness,
The tender torments, and the sadness, 
The storm and strife, the frequent feast; 
For all your great gifts and your least, 
My thanks. Alike in peace and riot 
I found you good, and I attest 
I tasted all your joys with zest;
Enough! My soul is calm and quiet
As on another road I fare.
To rest from loads I used to bear.
Let me look back. Farewell, then, bowers
Where I would loll, without a goal, 
xlvi But lulled by the fond dream that dowers
With joy the contemplative soul!
And you, oh, youthful inspiration,
Come, rouse anew imagination —
Upon the dull mind’s slumbers break.
My little nook do not forsake;
Let not the poet’s heart know capture
By sullen time, and soon grow wry 
And hard and cold, and petrify 
Here in the world’s benumbing rapture, 
This pool we bathe in, friends, this muck 
In which, God help us, we are stuck.
Chapter Seven
MOSCOW, Russia’s darling daughter,
where’s your equal to be found?
DMITRIYEV
HOW CAN ONE NOT LOVE MOSCOW, PRAY?
BARATYNSKY
SPEAK ILL OF MOSCOW! THERE’s YOUR TRAVELER!
WHERE WILL YOU FIND A BETTER PLACE, GOOD SIR? 
OH, YES, what’s FAR AWAY, THAT WE PREFER!
GRIBOYEDOV
/■ ■ ;|l nil 1 1 y
From nearby hills the snow, already
Obeying the spring sun’s commands,
Flows down in muddy streams and steady
Into the flooded meadowlands.
Still half asleep, nature is meeting
The year’s bright dawn with gentle greeting.
The heavens glow with azure light.
The naked woods surprise the sight,
A delicate green down assuming.
The bee deserts her waxen cell
To gather tribute from the dell.
Soon the dry valleys will be blooming;
The cattle low; the nightingale
Has thrilled by night the silent dale.
Ah, spring, fair spring, the lovers’ season,
How sad I find you! How you flood 
My soul with dreams that challenge reason. 
And with strange languor fill my blood!
My stricken heart cries out and fails me
When once the breath of spring assails me, 
Although its touch be soft as fleece.
While I lie lapped in rural peace!
Is it that I was born to languish.
And all that sparkles, triumphs, sings.
Is alien to my breast, and brings
No gift but weariness and anguish 
To one whose soul has perished, and 
Who sees the dark on every hand?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Or is it that we fail to cherish
The tender leaves, but in the spring 
III Mourn those that autumn doomed to perish.
The while we hear the woodland sing?
Or are our thoughts in truth so cruel
That natiure’s season of renewal 
But brings to mind our fading years 
That no hope of renewal cheers?
Or it may be that we are taken
In our poetic reverie
Far back to a lost spring, and we.
By dreams of a far country shaken.
Recall with pain the vanished boon:
A night of magic, and a moon . . .
Kind drones, and you who wisely savor
Your pleasures with a taste more keen,
IV And you who bask in fortune’s favor.
And you, skilled pupils of Levshin,
You rustic Priams, and you gentle
Fair ladies who are sentimental —
Spring calls you to the verdant soil.
To sunny gardens’ fragrant toil;
The time of tempting nights approaches,
When every walk fresh wonders yields;
Then, hurry, hurry to the fields!
Have your own horses pull your coaches,
Or post-horses, if thus inclined.
But fast or slow, leave town behind!
And you, my reader, wise and witty.
In your imported carriage, pray
V Desert at last the restless city
Where winter-long you were so gay;
And while my wanton muse rejoices
We’ll listen to the forest voices.
Upon the nameless river’s shore
In that same hamlet where of yore 
My Eugene through the winter tarried.
An idle, cheerless recluse, near
Young Tanya, whom I still hold dear.
Poor dreamer whom he sadly harried;
But where no more one meets his face . . .
And where he left a lasting trace.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Within the hill -encircled valley
Come seek the stream that slowly goes 
VI Through meadowland and linden alley.
On down to where the river flows.
The nightingale, this season’s lover,
There sings all night; wild roses cover
The bank; one hears a gentle spring;
And where two pines their shadows fling
A gravestone tells its mournful story.
The passer-by may read it clear:
' ’Vladimir Lensky slumbers here.
Who early found both death and glory.
In such a year, at such an age;
Take rest, young poet, as thy wage.”
Upon a trailing branch suspended
Above this modest urn there hung 
Vll A wreath, that by the breeze befriended
Caressed the tomb o’er which it swung.
There, when the tardy moon was shining. 
Two girls would come, and sadly twining 
Their arms about each other, creep 
To the low grave, to sit and weep.
But now . . . the tombstone and its story
Are quite forgot- The path is now 
O’ergrown. No wreath hangs on the bough; 
Alone the shepherd, weak and hoary.
As erstwhile comes, to hum an air
And plait his humble footgear there.
Poor Lensky! Olga’s heart was laden
With sorrow, but her tears were brief.
Vlll Alas! a young and lively maiden
IX Can scarce be faithful to her grief.
X Another captured her attention,
Another’s amorous invention
Soon found a way to soothe her pain;
An uhlan wooed her, not in vain;
She loves an uhlan with devotion . . .
Already, ’neath the bridal crown.
Before the altar, head cast down.
She stands, suffused with shy emotion.
Her lowered eyes agleam the while,
And on her lips a careless smile.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Poor Lensky! Past the grave’s grim portal.
Was the sad singer shocked to learn 
XI That Olga’s love, alas, was mortal.
And did his shade in sorrow yearn?
Or, lulled by Lethe’s quiet flowing,
And blissful still, since all unknowing,
By nothing stirred, where all is dim.
Is this world shut for aye to him?
Oblivion is waiting for us
Beyond the grave, yes, at the end 
The voice of mistress, foe, and friend,
Is hushed. Alone the angry chorus
Of heirs is heard, indecently 
Disputing your small legacy.
Not long the Larin house was waking
To Olga’s voice: away she went,
Xll Since now her uhlan was betaking
Himself back to his regiment.
The poor old lady, broken-hearted.
Wept o’er her daughter as they parted,
And seemed about to faint and fall;
But Tanya had no tears at all;
And yet her face was pale and clouded
As that of one beneath a spell.
When all went out to say farewell,
And round the loaded carriage crowded,
She too at length came forth, and nigh 
The couple stood, to say good-bye.
As one who through a fog is peering,
Tatyana watched them drive away 
Xlli Till they were out of sight and hearing . . .
She is alone, alack-a-day!
The comrade upon whom she doted.
Her dove, her confidante devoted,
Is snatched away from her by Fate
Who best knows how to separate.
She has no aim, no occupation.
But like a shadow moves about,
Or on the garden gazes out . . .
But nothing offers consolation.
Nor eases tears too long suppressed.
Nor soothes the ache within her breast.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Tatyana’s solitude adds fuel
To her vain passion day by day;
XIV Her heart speaks ever of the cruel
Onegin, also far away.
She will not see him, the betrayer;
Nay, she must hate her brother’s slayer.
The poet is no more ... his lot
Was to be readily forgot.
Though he was brave, though he was gifted,
His bride was soon content to be 
Another’s, and his memory 
Like smoke across the azure drifted;
Two hearts, one may perhaps believe.
Yet grieve for him . . . But wherefore grieve?
By the still stream, with dusk descending.
One heard the crickets’ slender choir.
XV The dancers from the green were wending.
On the far bank the smoky fire
Built by the fishermen was flaring.
Now through the open meadow faring,
Where moonlight silvered shrub and stone, 
Tatyana, dreaming, walked alone.
She clambered up a hill, commanding
A village view she seemed to know,
A garden river-girt, and lo!
Near by, she saw the mansion standing.
Tanya surveys it with a start.
And faster, faster throbs her heart.
A trespasser may hope for pardon.
'T am not known here. He is gone . . .
XVI I might just see the house and garden,”
She thinks, uncertain, and goes on.
Her mind with agitation seething,
Downhill she_trudges, scarcely breathing.
She looks about in puzzled sort.
And enters the deserted court.
The dogs attack her, all but biting
The stranger. At her frightened cry,
Out from the house the serf -boys fly,
A noisy brood. Not without fighting.
They chase the dogs away, alert
Lest the young lady should be hurt.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
^'The manor-house,” says Tanya, shyly,
”I should most dearly like to see.”
XVll At once the children run off spryly
To ask Anisya for the key.
Anisya surely won’t ignore them;
Yes, now the door is opened for them,
And Tanya enters. Here her prince.
Our hero, lived not so long since.
She looks about, with heart that flutters:
A cue rests on the table -top.
Upon the couch, a riding-crop.
She walks ahead. The old crone mutters:
”The fireplace, miss, please look at it — 
’Twas here the master used to sit.
^^With the late Lensky almost nightly
He dined here. What fine gentlemen!
XVlll Please follow me,” she said politely.
”Here you will find the master’s den.
He took his coffee here, and rested,
The steward came here when requested;
Here, mornings, he would read his book . . . 
This too was the old master’s nook;
Of Sundays, putting on his glasses,
It was his pleasure quietly
To play a game of cards with me,
Beside the window. So life passes . . .
May his soul now be with the blest.
And in the grave his bones have rest!”
Tatyana thrills with pain and pleasure
At everything she gazes on;
XIX Each object seems a priceless treasure,
Commemorating one who’s gone;
She looks, half soothed and half excited,
First at the desk, with lamp unlighted.
The pile of books no longer read,
Then at the rug that decks the bed,
The haughty portrait of Lord Byron,
The view into the moonlit night.
And likes the pallid evening light
That shows a statuette of iron:
The arms are crossed — a well-known pose —
The hat is cocked, the brow morose.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
In the smart sanctum, all a -quiver,
Tatyana, spell-bound, lingers still.
XX But it is late. Above the river.
The grove’s asleep. The wind blows chill.
The dale is dark and vapor-ridden.
Behind a hill the moon is hidden;
And pleasant though it is to roam.
The fair young pilgrim must go home.
Pretending calmness, Tanya quitted 
The room, though not without a sigh.
And pleading first that by-and-by
She might return; yes, if permitted. 
Although the house was empty, she 
Would make the den her library.
She halted at the gate-way, telling
The housekeeper a slow good-bye;
XXI And came to the abandoned dwelling
Next day before the sun was high.
Into the silent study, setting
Aside all timid thoughts, forgetting 
The world without, Tatyana crept.
And there she stayed, and wept, and wept.
The volumes at long last succeeding 
In catching Tanya’s eye, she took 
A glance at many a curious book.
And all seemed dull. But soon the reading
Absorbed the girl, and she was thrown 
Headlong into a world unknown.
Onegin’s taste for books had vanished
Long since, but notice if you please 
XXll That there were works he never banished
From his affection; they were these:
Lord Byron’s tales, which well consorted
With two or three bright -backed imported 
Romances, upon every page 
Exhibiting the present age,
And modern man’s true soul divulging:
A creature arid, cold, and vain.
Careless of others’ joy and pain.
In endless reverie indulging,
One whose embittered mind finds zest
In nothing, but can never rest.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
xxiv
Some pages held a sharp incentive
To reading, where a finger-nail 
Had marked the place; and, more attentive, 
Tatyana scanned them without fail.
She noted, trembling and excited.
What passage, what remark delighted
Onegin, what shrewd line expressed 
A thought in which he acquiesced.
She found the margins most appealing:
The pencil-marks he made with care
Upon the pages everywhere 
Were all unconsciously revealing:
A cross, a question-mark, a word —
From these the man might be inferred.
So Tanya bit by bit is learning
The truth, and, God be praised, can see 
At last for whom her heart is yearning 
By Fate’s imperious decree.
A danger to all lovely ladies,
Is he from Heaven or from Hades?
This strange and sorry character,
Angel or fiend, as you prefer.
What is he? A mere imitation,
A Muscovite in Harold’s cloak,
A wretched ghost, a foreign joke
But with a new interpretation,
A lexicon of snobbery
And fashion, or a parody?
Has she the answer to the riddle
And has she found the word? She lets
The time run on, and in the middle
Of her researches quite forgets
She should go home, where guests are waiting
And where indeed of her they’re prating.
"What’s to be done? She’s not a child,”
The mother groans. "It drives me wild;
I’ve married off my younger daughter,
Tatyana should be settled, too.
But, heavens, what am I to do
When she can only throw cold water 
On every single suitor’s hopes?
All day she roams the woods and mopes.”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
love with someone?” ”But who is it?
Buyanov’s hand she has refused,
XXvi And Petushkov’s. We had a visit
From the hussar, Pykhtin, who used
As many wiles as I could mention 
To win her — showed her such attention! 
She must accept at last, I thought.
But no! the whole thing came to naught.”
” You ’ll have to take her to the city —
To Moscow: it’s the brides’ bazaar;
That’s where the eligibles are!”
”Not on my income, more’s the pity!”
”But for a season it will do;
If not, my dear. I’ll see you through.”
By this delightful counsel guided,
The mother fell to figuring
XXVll Expenses, and therewith decided
A Moscow winter was the thing.
The news gives Tanya little pleasure.
To let the worldlings take the measure
Of her demure provincial ways,
Revealing to their haughty gaze
Her dowdy frocks, and to their mercies 
Her countrified simplicity 
Of speech, and earn the mockery 
Of Moscow beaus and Moscow Circes!
Oh, horror! Better far to stay
Safe in the woodland, hid away.
She rises as the morning flushes
With rosy light the eastern skies,
XXviii And off into the fields she rushes,
To say, with sorrow in her eyes:
"Farewell, you dear and peaceful valleys,
Familiar hills, familiar alleys.
You woodlands where I used to roam,
Farewell, you friendly skies of home;
Kind, cheerful nature, it is bitter
To leave such quiet haunts as these 
For worldly shows and vanities.
The crowd, the hubbub, and the glitter!
And why? What am I striving for?
What does my future hold in store?”
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Seven
xxxi
Her walks are longer, she will dally
Beside a stream, or on a hill.
And find, wherever she may sally
Some charming spot to hold her still.
Among her groves and meadows ranging.
Her fondness for them never changing.
She speaks to them as to old friends.
But all too soon the summer ends.
And golden autumn is arriving.
Pale nature shudders, tempest -tossed.
Decked out as for a holocaust . . .
The north wind breathes and bellows, driving
The clouds before him — can it be?
Winter, the sorceress, ’tis she!
In many guises she comes flying:
Upon the oak her tufts are hung;
About the hills and meadows lying.
Her billowy soft rugs are flung;
A touch, and the sharp cliffs are beveled,
The river and its banks are leveled;
Frost glistens. Mother Winter’s arts
Are dazzling, and rejoice our hearts.
But Tanya does not share our pleasure.
And heedless of the winter fun.
She does not sniff the cold, or run
To the low roof to fetch her measure 
Of snow, and wash her face and chest.
She glances at the road, distressed.
The day upon which they intended
To leave, is gone; they let time slip 
Away, while the old sleigh was mended 
And re-upholstered for the trip.
The three kibitkas customary
Are crammed with all that’s necessary:
With chairs and chests and casseroles,
With jams and featherbeds and bowls.
With cocks in cages (these one slaughters
In town), with pots and pans and gear 
Of all sorts; finally you hear 
A noise off in the servants’ quarters 
Of loud farewells and crying maids;
And now they bring out eighteen jades.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
xxxiii
And while the breakfast is preparing
They hitch them to the master’s sleigh; 
The maids and coachmen vie in swearing; 
The loads on the kibitkas sway.
The bearded old postilion’s mounted —
His nag has ribs that might be counted. 
The servants gather at the gates 
For the good-byes; the turn-out waits. 
The ladies enter; now it’s gliding 
Away, the good old sleigh, at last. 
’’Farewell, the days of peace are past; 
You haunts where I might stay in hiding. 
Farewell! Forever, or for years?”
Tatyana cannot stop her tears.
Enlightenment may be belated
With us, but grows apace; indeed, 
Philosophers have calculated 
Five centuries are all we need 
To have our roads completely mended, 
And the improvement will be splendid! 
For all through Russia there will run 
Highways to make the country one.
We shall have arched, cast-iron bridges
And tunnels under water, too.
And if that’s not enough to do,
We’ll split apart the mountain ridges,
And not a station will be known
Without a tavern of its own.
Just now our roads are bad for coaches;
Forgotten bridges rot and sink;
And at the stations lice and roaches
Refuse to let you sleep a wink;
There are no inns. In a cold cottage
You scarce can get a dish of pottage:
The menu hangs there, in plain sight.
But just to tease your appetite;
While with his clumsy Russian hammer
The rustic cyclop labors, daft,
At Europe’s dainty handicraft,
And blesses, as he halts his clamor,
The ruts and ditches that abound
Wherever there is Russian ground.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
xxxvi
But journeys made in wintry weather
Are far too pleasant to seem long.
The highroad, leveled altogether,
Runs smoothly as a hackneyed song.
Our dapper coachmen are astounding,
Our troikas tireless, forward bounding.
Mile-posts rejoice the idle eye,
They look like fenceposts, flashing by.
But Tanya’s mother, not ignoring
The cost of post-horses, was glad 
To use her own, and hence they had 
To rest the nags: the halts were boring. 
And Tanya found the journey bleak.
They had to travel for a week.
The goal is there before them. Blazing
Like fire, the gilded crosses rise 
Above the domes of Moscow, dazing 
With splendor unaccustomed eyes.
Ah, friends, how I rejoiced, beholding
The terraced scene, the view unfolding 
Of park and palace, dome and spire,
With every church in bright attire.
How often, sick with separation,
My thoughts in exile turned to you,
Oh, Moscow, Moscow! I would view
You in my fond imagination . . .
Moscow: those syllables can start
A tumult in the Russian heart!
There the Petrovsky Palace, hiding
Its splendor among ancient trees,
Stands grim and grand, morosely priding
Itself upon its memories.
For here, Napoleon, elated
With his last victory, awaited 
In vain a Moscow on her knees 
To tender him the Kremlin keys.
But it was not capitulation
My Moscow offered Bonaparte —
No feast, no gift to warm his heart:
But she prepared a conflagration.
From here he watched with thoughtful eyes
The fierce flames reddening the skies.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
You witness of that fallen glory.
Farewell, proud palace! But why wait?
tXXVlll On with the journey and the story!
The columns of the city gate
Gleam white; the sleigh, more swift than steady. 
Bumps down Tverskaya Street already.
Past sentry-boxes now they dash,
Past shops and lamp-posts, serfs who lash
Their nags, huts, mansions, monasteries,
Parks, pharmacies, Bohkarans, guards.
Fat merchants, Cossacks, boulevards,
Old W’omen, boys with cheeks like cherries,
Lions on gates with great stone jaws,
And crosses black with flocks of daws.
So to their destination straightway
They traveled, but a dull hour passed 
Before they halted at a gateway 
Off in a narrow lane, at last.
They’d come to an old aunt, now failing —
For four long years she had been ailing.
A Kalmuck, spectacled and worn,
Flings wide the door; his caftan’s torn,
He holds a stocking he was mending;
Upon the parlor sofa lies
The princess, and her feeble cries 
Of welcome are indeed heart-rending.
The two old women weep, embrace.
And soon their tongues begin to race.
''Princesses ’Tachettel I can’t believe it!”
”Yes, after all these years. Aline!”
xli ”How long do you remain?” ^Conceive it!”
”Sit down, mon angeS ”My dear Cousine!'^
”It’s like a novel . . . life’s so chancey • . .”
”And this is my Tatyana.” 'Taney!
Come here, my dear. Why, this seems all
A dream . . . Cousine^ do you recall 
Your Grandison?” "I can’t remember —
My Grandison? Oh, Grandison!
Where is he? Y'es, I know the one.”
"He lives in Moscow. Last December
It was he came to visit me.
His son was married recently.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
^'The other . . . But we’ve time tomorrow,
N'est-ce pas, for all we want of talk? 
xlii We’ll show off Tanya. To my sorrow,
I can’t go out: I cannot walk —
My legs betray me . . . But it’s tiring
To travel, you must be desiring 
As I am, too, a little rest:
We’ll go together , . . Oh, my chest! . . .
Just think, this joy, I can’t endure it.
Let alone grief ... I have no strength . . .
My dear, when old age comes at length
It’s misery, and who can cure it?”
At that she could no longer hide
Her weakness, and she coughed and cried.
Tatyana cannot but be grateful
To the kind invalid, and yet 
xliii She finds the city cold and hateful.
And does not cease to pine and fret.
Behind the strange bed’s silken curtain
She lies for hours, with sleep uncertain;
And the poor girl is roused betimes
Each morning by the Moscow chimes,
The call to early labors dinning;
Out of the window she may stare —
She will not find her meadows there.
When the deep shades of night are thinning:
She sees a court she does not know,
A kitchen and a fence below.
There is a dinner-party daily
Where Tanya’s met with ”oh-s” and ”ah-s,” 
xliv Her wistful languor greeted gaily
By grandmammas and grandpapas.
The relatives — and there are dozens —
Are cordial to the country cousins.
And all exclaim delightedly
And offer hospitality.
”How Tanya’s grown! Why, how long is it
Since you were christened? Gracious sakes!
I boxed your ears! I gave you cakes!”
She hears it all at every visit.
In chorus the old ladies cry:
”Dear me, the years have just flown by!”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
They do not change, depend upon it.
But keep to their familiar ways:
xlv Princess Yelena wears the bonnet
Of tulle she wore in other days;
Lukerya Lvovna still paints thickly,
Lubov Petrovna lies as quickly,
Ivan Petrovich ne’er was keen,
Semyon Petrovich is as mean.
Aunt Pelageya still possesses
Monsieur Finemouche, friend of the house, 
And the same pom, and the same spouse, 
The well-known clubman, who, God bless us, 
Is just as deaf and just as meek.
And gorges seven days a week.
Their daughters, after due embraces.
Examine Tanya silently
xlvi From head to foot, and Moscow’s Graces
Are quite perplexed by such as she:
They find her odd — so unaffected.
So countrified, a bit dejected,
A namby-pamby, colorless
And thin, but pretty, more or less;
Yet soon they let down their defences.
Invite her, kiss her, press her hands.
Fluff up her hair as style commands.
And murmur sing-song confidences,
Relating with romantic art
The girlish secrets of the heart,
Reciting all their hopes with candor,
Their conquests and their pranks with glee;
xlvii Embellished with a little slander,
The simple talk flows readily.
Then they demand in compensation
That she should offer a narration 
Of her own heart’s shy hopes and fears;
But Tanya, dreaming, hardly hears,
And does not pay the least attention.
But listens with an absent smile.
And guards in silence all the while
The secret she will never mention,
The treasure none can ever guess,
The source of tears and happiness.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
The parlor hums with conversation,
111 which Tatyana ought to share
xlviii She thinks, hut it is sheer vexation
To hear the vulgar chatter there.
Such people with each day grow duller.
Their very slander has no color;
And every query, every tale,
Their news, their gossip — all arc stale.
The hours go by: they do not waken;
No witty thought occurs, no word
Even by accident is heard 
Whereby the mind or heart is shaken.
Oh, empty world! Oh, stupid folk
Who neither crack nor are a joke!
Viewed by the archive youths w^ho cluster
At any gathering or dance,
xlix The poor young girl does not pass muster —
They eye our heroine askance.
One clownish fellow, idly leaning
Against a door, remarks with meaning 
That she’s ideal — he must jot 
A poem to her on the spot.
Once Vyazemsky sat down beside her
When he was calling on an aunt 
Where entertainment was but scant;
And an old gentleman espied her,
Asked who she was, set straight his wig,
And gave his neighbor’s ribs a dig.
But where Melpomene’s bold gesture
Displays to the indifferent crowed 
I The taw^dry glitter of her vesture.
The while she howls both long and loud;
Where Thalia as she’s gently napping 
Is heedless of the friendly clapping;
And where the youthful galaxy
Admires alone Terpsichore 
(As was the case, upon my honor.
In our lime too, in days of old),
The proud lorgnettes the ladies hold
Were in no instance trained upon her,
Nor, from the loge and the parterre,
The eyeglass of the connoisseur.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
They take her to the Club for dances.
The rooms are thronged and hot and gay.
li The blare, the lights, the shining glances.
The couples as they whirl aw*ay,
The lovely ladies’ filmy dresses.
The balcony where such a press is,
The young and hopeful brides-to-be,
Confound the senses suddenly.
Here dandies now in the ascendant
Show off their impudence, their vests.,
Their monocles that rake the guests.
And here hussars on leave, resplendent
And thunderous, flock eagerly:
They come, they conquer, and they flee.
The stars of night are fair and many,
The Moscow belies are many, too.
Hi Yet brighter shines the moon than any
Of her companions in the blue.
But she in whom my thoughts are rooted.
Before whom my bold lyre is muted,
’Mid maids and matrons seems to glide
Like to the moon in lonely pride.
How heavenly, as she advances,
Her motion, in pure splendor dressed!
What languor fills her lovely breast!
What languor in her magic glances!
But now, enough, have done; for you
Have paid to folly what’s her due.
They waltz, they bow, they curtsey, flitting
About: a noisy laughing host . . . 
liii While unobserved, Tatyana’s sitting
Between two aunts, beside a post,
And stares unseeing, in no hurry
To join the hateful worldly flurry.
She stifles here . . . her heart is sore.
And turns to what is hers no more:
The country life, the rustic hovels.
The lonely thicket where a stream
Is all abubble and agleam,
Her flowers, her romantic novels,
And most, the linden-shaded ways
Where he had met her ravished gaze.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Seven
Thus far away her thoughts are flying;
The world, the ball, are both forgot,
liv When a great general, espying
The girl, stands rooted to the spot*
The aunts, of one thing only thinking.
Each to the other slyly winking,
Together nudge Tatyana and
Each whispers from behind her hand:
^Took quickly to the left.” But balking.
She asks: ”The left? What’s there to see?”
'^Just look . . . that man . . . he’s one of three 
In uniform . . . Now he is walking 
Away, his profile may be seen ...”
'^Who? That fat general, you mean?”
Tatyana’s brilliant catch discerning,
We think good wishes are the thing.
Iv But it is time I was returning
To him of whom indeed I sing . . •
And by the way, now that I mention
The subject, give me your attention:
Of my young friend I sing, and of
His whims; 0 hover thou above 
My labors — bless them with thy beauty^
Thou epic Muse! Upon my way
Be thou my staffs nor let me stray.
Enough. Though late, I’ve done my duty,
To classicism doffed my hat:
Here’s the exordium. That’s that!
Chapter Eight
FARE THEE WELL, AND IF FOR EVER
STILL FOR EVER FARE THEE WELL.
BYRON
When, a Lyceum lad, I flourished.
And roamed its gardens at my ease,
On Apuleius gladly nourished.
While Cicero could scarcely please;
When in the springtime I would dally
To watch the swans in some dim valley 
And hear, above the lake, their cries,
The Muse first shone before my eyes.
My student cell grew bright with treasures
Such as the Muse alone can bring;
Thither she came to sport and sing
Of youthful pranks and childish pleasures, 
And of the glorious days of old,
Of all the dreams the heart can hold.
And the world smiled upon her, pressing
On us the favors that men crave;
We won good old Derzhavin’s blessing
Upon the threshold of his grave.
Djc !|e
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
And I, all discipline refusing,
Took wilful passion for my guide;
ill My path was what the crowd was choosing;
The lively Muse was at my side
At giddy feasts and wild discussions,
And when, at midnight, madcap Russians,
We scared patrols with blatant noise;
She shared our banquets, crowned our joys —
Like a Bacchante at the revels.
Sang for the guests across the wine,
And ardently this Muse of mine
Was wooed by passionate young devils*
My flighty friend made quite a stir.
In short, and I was proud of her.
But this gay circle I deserted.
And fled afar . . . She followed me.
IV How often, by her tales diverted
As I fared onward gloomily,
I heard her friendly accents soften;
And on Caucasian cliffs how often.
Like pale Lenore, by moonlight she
Would gallop side by side with me!
How oft on the dark shores of Tauris
She bade me hear the waters sing,
The Nereids’ low murmuring.
The sounding waves’ eternal chorus,
And the deep seas His praise rehearse
Who fathered the vast universe.
The feasts where wealth and wit were squandered,
The dazzling capital, forgot —
V To sad Moldavia she wandered.
And in that far and savage spot
Among the tents of nomads moving.
Full soon my errant Muse was proving
As wild as they: forsook her songs 
For the wild steppes’ barbaric tongues,
The language of the gods rejected . . .
Then all is changed. For lo! she veers,
And as a rural miss appears
Within my garden, unexpected;
There, wistful-eyed, behold her stand,
With a French volume in her hand.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
And now for the first time I’m bringing
My Muse to a superb soiree;
VI And jealous fears my heart are stinging
As I her rustic charms survey.
Past thick-ranked guests, aristocratic,
Renowned, resplendent, diplomatic.
Fine ladies, military fops.
She glides; and now serenely stops,
And, seated, eagerly is eyeing
The glitter of the noisy press.
The flash of wit, the flouncing dress.
The gallants for their hostess vying.
The ladies, each a picture when
Framed somberly by gentlemen.
She likes the talk of haughty sages
Pursued with so much elegance;
Vll And the assorted ranks and ages,
And pride that ever looks askance.
But in a corner who is standing,
The throng with a mute eye commanding?
He seems, indeed, an alien here,
To whom these faces all appear
But tiresome ghosts. Can we unmask him? 
And does his somber aspect mean 
Offended vanity or spleen?
Why is he here? Who is he? Task him!
Can it be Eugene? Truly? . . . Aye!
"When did he get here, by the bye?
"Has he grown tame at last, and mellow?
Or does he follow his old bent 
Vlll And as of yore play the odd fellow?
Pray whom now does he represent?
Would he be Melmoth or Childe Harold,
Or as a Quaker go appareled,
A bigot seem — a patriot —
A cosmopolitan — or what?
To a new pose will he be goaded,
Or in the end will he just be
A decent chap — ^like you and me?
I say: give up a style outmoded.
It’s time he ceased to be a show . .
"Ah, then you know him?” "Yes, and no.”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
^^Then why upbraid him thus severely?
Is it because we like to sit
IX Upon the judgment-seat, or merely
Because rash ardor and quick wit
Are found absurd or else offensive 
By those whose parts are not extensive?
Is it because intelligence
Loves elbow-room and thrusts us hence?
Or is stupidity malicious —
And trifles of importance to
Important folk, and is it true 
That only mediocrity 
Befits and pleases you and me?”
Blessed is he who could be merry
And young in youth; blessed is he 
X Who ripened, like good port or sherry,
As years went by, and readily
Grew worldly-wise as life grew chilly,
Gave up his dreams as wild and silly:
At twenty to the fashion bred,
At thirty profitably wed.
Quite free of all his debts at fifty.
Obtaining, with himself to thank.
First glory, and then wealth and rank.
All in good time, serene and thrifty —
Of whom ’twas said throughout his span:
X. is an admirable man.
But oh, how deeply we must rue it.
That youth was given us in vain,
Xi That we were hourly faithless to it,
And that it cheated us again;
That our bright pristine hopes grew battered,
Our freshest dreams grew sear, and scattered 
Like leaves that in wet autumn stray. 
Wind-tossed, and all too soon decay.
It’s maddening to see before you
A row of dinners, dull and sure,
Find life a function to endure.
Go with the solemn folk who bore you.
For all their views and passions not,
At heart, giving a single jot.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
The gossips ever are malicious,
And it is %^ery hard to bear
Xli 'When they proclaim you odd or vicious,
Dub you a rogue, which is unfair.
Or else my demon — condemnation
Enough to kill a reputation.
Onegin (I return to him).
Having, to satisfy a whim.
Dispatched his friend, and had his pleasure,
And, with no aim on which to fix,
Having attained to twenty -six —
Blase, growm tired of empty leisure.
Without affairs, or rank, or wife,
Found nothing fit to fill his life.
Thus he grew restless and decided
That he must have a change of scene
XIII (A plaguey wish by which are guided
The few who relish toil and teen).
He left his rustics to their tillage,
Abandoning his pleasant village.
The fields’ and forests’ solitude
Where still the bloody ghost pursued.
And started on his aimless cruising.
By one emotion only stirred;
Till travel, as you’ll have inferred,
Ceased, like all else, to be amusing.
So he returned, took Chatzky’s cue.
And forthwith to a ball he flew.
And now the guests, exchanging glances.
And whispering, make quite a stir:
XIV A lady down the room advances,
A haughty general after her.
She is not hurried, is not chilly,
Nor full of idle chat and silly;
She lacks the look of snobbishness,
The cold pretensions to success.
The little tricks that are affected
By ladies in society . . .
Hers is a calm simplicity.
She seems the image quite perfected
Of comme il faut — Shishkov, berate 
Me if you must: I can’t translate.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
The ladies all pressed closer to her;
Old women smiled as she went by;
XV Men, while they did not dare pursue her.
Bowed lower, sought to catch her eye;
Young girls, in passing, hushed their chatter;
The general, since such tributes flatter 
An escort much, puffed out his chest 
And raised his nose above the rest.
She was no beauty: that were fiction
To utter, yet she’d not a trace.
From head to foot, in form or face.
Of what, in fashionable diction
And in high London circles, they 
Term vulgar. To my great dismay,
Although I find it so expressive.
The word is one I can’t translate:
XVI Its vogue — since we are not progressive.
And the word’s new — should not be great.
For epigrams it would be splendid . . .
But here’s our lady unattended.
All nonchalance and charm and grace,
She at a table took her place
Beside that most superb of creatures,
Fair Nina Voronskaya, who
Presents to the Neva a view 
Of Cleopatra, but whose features.
However dazzling to the sight.
Cannot eclipse her neighbor’s quite.
''Can it, indeed,” thinks Eugene, ''can it
Be she? It is . . . But no . . . And yet . . .
XVll To come, as from another planet,
From that dull hole . . And his lorgnette
Repeatedly and almost grimly 
Is trained on her whose features dimly 
Remind him of a face forgot.
"Forgive me. Prince, but can you not
Say who it is that now the Spanish 
Ambassador is speaking to?
She’s wearing raspberry.” "Yes, you
Have been away! Before you vanish 
Again, you’ll meet her, ’pon my life!”
"But tell me who she is.” "My wife.”
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
that is news — couldn’t be better!
Been married long?” ^’Two years.” whom?”
Xviii ”A Larina.” ”Tanya?” ”You’ve met her?”
am their neighbor.” ”Come, resume
Your friendship.” At this invitation 
The prince’s comrade and relation 
Now met his spouse. The princess gazed 
At him . . . And if she was amazed,
And if the sudden sight dismayed her.
And if her soul was deeply stirred,
No look, no tremor, not a word
In any small degree betrayed her:
Her manner was what it had been
Before, her bow was as serene.
Not only did she fail to shiver.
Turn pale or blush, as one distressed . . .
xix Her eyebrows did not even quiver,
Nor yet were her soft lips compressed.
Not all Onegin’s observation
Could show him an approximation 
To Tanya of the days that were;
He wanted to converse with her
And . . . could not. Now she spoke, inquiring
When he had come, and if, of late.
He’d had a glimpse of his estate;
Then, with a look that showed her tiring,
Begged that her husband sniffer her
To leave . . . Our Eugene could not stir.
Can it be that Tatyana truly
Whom, at the start of our romance,
XX Quite tete-a-tete he’d lectured duly
(You will recall the circumstance)?
How noble was the tone he’d taken;
The spot itself was God-forsaken.
Can this be she who long since wrote —
He has it still — a touching note,
A letter heartfelt, artless, candid;
That little girl ... is it a dream?
That little girl he did not deem
It wrong to scorn when pride commanded —
Can it be she who only now
Showed him so cold and calm a brow?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
He quits the rout, and, meditating.
Drives home; and so at last to bed:
XXI Thoughts sad and sweet still agitating
The sleepless fellow’s heart and head.
He wakes to find a note — that’s pleasant:
The prince invites him to be present 
At a soiree. '^God! to see her! . . .
I’ll go!” And he does not defer
The polite ”yes” that is behooving.
Is he bewitched? It’s very droll.
By what is his cold torpid soul
Now stirred? Is it vexation moving 
The man? Or vanity, forsooth?
Or love, the grave concern of youth?
He counts the slow hours, vainly trying
To hurry them: he cannot wait.
XXll The clock strikes ten: he’s off, he’s flying,
And suddenly he’s at the gate.
He goes in to the princess, quaking;
Tatyana is alone; but making 
An eiffort to converse with her.
He finds that no remarks occur
To him; and thereby sadly daunted, 
Onegin fumbles as he seeks 
To answer when the lady speaks.
By one persistent thought he’s haunted.
He does not cease his stubborn stare:
She sits with an untroubled air.
The husband enters: the appalling
Bleak tete-a-t^te concludes; he cheers 
XXlll His friend Onegin by recalling
The pranks and jokes of former years.
The guests, arriving, hear their laughter. 
The talk is seasoned well thereafter 
With the coarse salt of malice, while 
Light nothings, spoken without guile 
And without foolish affectation.
Give way in turn to common sense:
Not deep or learned or intense.
But reasonable conversation.
That does not frighten anyone
With a too wanton kind of fun.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
XXV
Here the patricians congregated.
Here fashionables would repair.
The dolts that must be tolerated.
The faces one meets everywhere;
Here, bonneted and wearing roses,
And with the malice time imposes.
Were ladies of a certain age,
And prim young misses looking sage;
Here an ambassador was weighing 
Affairs of state, and over there 
An ancient, with perfumed gray hair, 
Was jesting subtly and displaying 
The fine keen wit of yesteryear 
Which nowadays seems somewhat queer.
Here was a man who had a weakness
For epigrams, and was annoyed 
By too-sweet tea, the ladies’ meekness, 
The tone the gentlemen employed,
A talked-of novel, rather hazy,
A monogram he found too mazy,
The lies that journals perpetrate,
The war, the snow-fall, and his mate.
And here too was [Prolasov], stunted
In soul, of all the guests the least 
Admired — ^in sketching whom you blunted 
Your wicked pencils, oh, St. Priest!
While in the doorway took his station —
As perfect as an illustration —
A ballroom tyrant, tightly laced,
Mute, motionless, and cherub -faced;
And there a traveler from a distance,
A brazen fellow, starched and proud.
With studied ways amused the crowd
That scarce had heard of his existence, 
And thought he met with no rebuff.
The guests’ sly glances were enough.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
xxviii
But Eugene’s sole preoccupation
Was with Tatyana — ^not, forsooth,
The poor shy girl whose adoration
Of him had filled his simple youth,
But the proud princess, cold and serious,
The queen, aloof, remote, imperious.
Of the magnificent Neva.
Oh, humans, like your first mamma.
Ancestral Eve, you find delightful 
Not what you have, but what you see 
Afar: the serpent and the tree 
Seduce you, though the cost be frightful. 
Forbidden fruits alone entice —
Without them, there’s no paradise.
How changed Tatyana is! How truly
She knows her role! With none to thank — 
Tutored by her own wit — she duly 
Bears the proud burden of her rank!
Who, in this cool majestic woman.
The ballroom’s ruler, scarcely human.
Would dare to seek that gentle girl?
And he had set her heart awhirl!
In the dark hours ere Morpheus, flying,
Approached her pillow, she would raise 
Toward the moon her languid gaze,
And sadly, virginally sighing,
Would dream of walking, bride and wife.
With him the humble road of life.
To love all ages owe submission;
To youthful hearts its tempests bring
The very boon they would petition,
As fields are blest by storms of spring:
The rain of passion is not cruel.
But bears refreshment and renewal —
There is a quickening at the root
That bodes full flowers and honeyed fruit. 
But at the late and sterile season,
At the sad turning of the years,
The tread of passion augurs tears:
Thus autumn gusts deal death and treason.
And turn the meadow to a marsh 
And leave the forests gaunt and harsh.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
xxxi
Alas, our poor Onegin’s smitten:
Tatyana fills his every thought;
His heart is by such anguish bitten
As only passion can have wrought.
He does not heed the mind’s reproaches,
But, rain or shine, each day his coach is
Before her door; he waits for her;
No shadow could be faithfuUer.
He knows dehght when he’s adjusting
The boa on her shoulders, and 
When his hot fingers touch her hand.
Or when through liveried throngs he’s thrusting
A way for her; he’s happy if 
He may pick up her handkerchief.
She does not heed: and sore it grieves him
To note how little she is stirred;
With perfect fireedom she receives him;
When guests are there, she says a word
Or bows to him — a cold convention;
At times she pays him no attention;
She has no trace of coquetry —
It’s frowned on in society.
But though Onegin’s peace forsake him
And his cheek pale, she does not see 
Or does not care; and all agree 
Consumption yet may overtake him.
He’s sent to doctors, the Neva’s
Best leeches send him to the spas.
But he refuses; he’s preparing
To meet his fathers speedily;
Tatyana shows no sign of caring
(Such is the sex, you will agree);
And he, reluctant to surrender,
Still clings to hope, though it be slender.
And far too wretched to be meek
He pens, with trembling hand and weak,
A missive eloquent of passion.
He did not value letters much.
And rightly, but his pain was such
That write he must, and in this fashion — 
Perhaps ’twill please you if I quote 
The very words Onegin wrote.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
ONEGIN’S LETTER
TO TATYANA
All is foreseen: when I confess
My mournful secret you will shun me:
And the grave eyes that have undone me
Will look with scorn on my distress!
Indeed what can I hope for ^ after
You know the truth? What is the use 
Of speech? For what malicious laughter 
Do I thus give you an excuse?
We met by chance; /, though^ perceiving
Affection^ s spark in you^ believing 
Myself mistaken, did not dare 
To let the tender habit seize me;
Although my freedom did not please me.
The loss of it I could not bear.
And one thing more put us asunder —
Poor Lensky fell . . . that luckless day.
From all the heart holds dear, my blunder
Forced me to tear my heart away;
An alien, roving unrestricted,
I took this peace, this liberty.
For happiness. Good God! I see
How justly now I am afflicted.
No, to he with you constantly;
To follow you with deep devotion;
And with enamored eyes to see
Each smile of yours, each glance, each motion;
To listen to you, late and soon;
To know you: spirit tuned to spirit;
In torment at your feet to swoon —
Were bliss; and death? I should not fear it!
It may not be: without relief,
I drag myself about; timers hasting.
And it is precious, being brief:
Yet in vain boredom I am wasting
The hours allotted me by Fate,
And oh, they are a weary weight!
My days are counted: Fve had warning;
But to endure I need one boon —
I must be certain in the morning
Of seeing you by afternoon . . . .
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
I fear lest in my supplication
You should perceive udth eye severe 
Onegin’s letter A trick worthy of detestation;
TO TATYANA Already your reproach I hear.
If you but knew how agonizing
It is to parch with hot desire^
By mental effort tranquilizing
The blood that burns tmth frantic fire;
To long to clasp your knees, and, throbbing
With anguish, pour out at your feet 
Appeal, complaint, confession, sobbing 
The wretched story out, complete —
And longing thus, be forced to meet you
With a feigned chill in look and voice. 
Converse at ease, seem to rejoice.
And with a cheerful eye to greet you ! —
So be it; but I had to speak;
Now I am at your mercy, guided
But by your will; my fate* s decided;
And I have learned how to be meek*
There is no answer to his letter;
A second, and a third he sends,
XXXlli Alas, these missives fare no better.
Then, at a party he attends
He comes upon her, as he enters.
How jfirmly her attention centers
On all but him! She never sees 
Onegin, but she seems to freeze 
As he comes near; it’s no illusion:
Upon her wrath her lips are sealed.
Onegin watches her, congealed:
Where is compassion, where confusion?
Is there a sign of tears? No trace! 
Mute anger only marks her face . . .
Eugene
XXXV
Onegin: Chapter Eight
Yes, and the fear of the impression
The world would gain if it should learn 
About her early indiscretion . . .
No more my Eugene could discern . . .
All hope is gone! He leaves, and curses
His madness — and again immerses 
Himself so deep in it that he 
Once more forsakes society.
Now in his study he bethought him
Of days long past, when he had been
A giddy fop, and cruel spleen
Had chased him and had quickly caught him.
And locked him in a corner where
The lonely gloom was hard to bear.
Again a book was his sole crony —
He read at will: Gibbon, Rousseau,
Chamfort and Herder and Manzoni,
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot;
Devoured Stendhal, the arrant skeptic.
And Fontenelle, acute, eupeptic;
And Russians too he would peruse:
He was not one to pick and choose.
He read miscellany and journal.
The magazines that like to scold
Us all, and where I now am told 
That my performance is infernal,
Though once they praised my magic pen:
E sempre bene, gentlemen.
What of it? Though his eyes were busy,
His mind was ever far away;
With whirling thoughts his soul grew dizzy,
And dreams and musings far from gay.
The page he read could scarcely bore him.
Because, between the lines before him. 
Another set of lines transpired 
Of which Onegin never tired.
These were the secret fond traditions
Of intimacies of the past.
And rootless dreams that could not last,
Vague threats, predictions, and suspicions,
A fairy tale that lasts the night,
Or letters that a girl might write.
Eugene Onegin : Chapter Eight
And as he reads, both thought and feeling
Are lulled to sleep, and readily 
XXXvii Imagination is unreeling
Its parti-colored pageantry.
The first clear picture is disclosing
A youth, who on the snow seems dozing;
As Eugene stares his heart is chilled
To hear a voice cry: ^'Well? He’s killed.” 
He sees forgotten foes, malicious 
Detractors, cowardly and vile,
And cruel traitresses who smile.
And old companions, dull and vicious;
A country house he next may see —
She’s at the window — always she! . . .
Thus sunk in reveries, he nearly
Went raving mad or worse: became 
XXXVlii A poet — this were paying dearly
For dreams, and would have been a shame.
But by some influence despotic.
Call it magnetic or hypnotic.
My brainless pupil almost learned
The way a Russian verse is turned.
He looked the poet, when he’d let a
Long evening pass, while he would sit 
Beside the fire and hum to it 
^'Idol mid’^ or ^^Benedetta^^'^
Until the flames blazed up anew
Fed by his slipper or review.
The days speed by; before you know it
New warmth has melted winter’s chain; 
XXXIX But he has not become a poet,
He did not die or go insane.
And now, at spring’s bright invitation.
He quits his place of hibernation —
Close as a marmot would require —
The double windows, the snug fire;
And one fibne morning finds him flying
Past the Neva in a swift sleigh;
On the streaked ice the sunbeams play;
Upon the streets the snow is lying,
By thaw and grimy steps defaced.
But whither in such anxious haste
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Does Eugene drive? Yes, I suspected
You knew the answer — as you say: 
xl This same odd fellow, uncorrected,
To his Tatyana makes his way.
Looking too corpselike to be nobby.
He walks into the empty lobby.
Each room he finds unoccupied.
Here is a door — ^he flings it wide,
And halts in sudden deep confusion;
What sight thus fills him with dismay?
The princess, pale, in neglige.
Pores o’er a letter, in seclusion;
Her cheek rests on her hand, and she
Is weeping, weeping quietly.
Her voiceless grief was past disguising;
In that swift moment one could see
xli The former Tanya, recognizing
Her in the princess readily!
As Eugene, by regrets distracted.
Fell at her feet, his heart contracted;
She shuddered, mute; her lovely eyes
Betrayed no anger, no surprise 
As she surveyed him . . . His dejected 
And healthless look, his dumb remorse — 
These spoke to her with silent force.
And in her soul was resurrected
The simple girl whose dreams, whose ways.
Whose heart belonged to other days.
She does not raise him, leaves him kneeling;
Nor from his greedy lips withdraws 
xLll Her passive hands; her pain concealing,
She gazes at him without pause . . .
What are her reveries unspoken?
The silence at long last is broken
As she says gently: ^^Rise; have done.
I must say candid words or none.
Onegin, need I ask you whether
You still retain the memory 
Of that lost hour beneath the tree 
When destiny brought us together?
You lectured me, I listened, meek;
Today it is my turn to speak.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
''Then I was younger, maybe better,
Onegin, and I loved you; well? 
xliii How did you take my girUsb letter?
Your heart responded how? Pray, tell!
Most harshly: there was no disguising
Your scorn. You did not find surprising 
The plain girl’s love? Why, even now,
I freeze — good God! — ^recalling how
You came and lectured me so coldly —
Your look that made my spirit sink!
But for that sermon do not think
I blame you . . . For you acted boldly. 
Indeed, you played a noble role:
I thank you from my inmost soul . . .
"Then, far from Moscow’s noise and glitter.
Off in the wilds — ^is it not true? — 
xliv You did not like me . . . That was bitter.
But worse, what now you choose to do!
Why do you pay me these attentions? 
Because society’s conventions,
Deferring to my wealth and rank.
Have given me prestige? Be frank!
Because my husband’s decoration,
A soldier’s, wins us friends at Court,
And ail would relish the report
That I had stained my reputation — 
’Twould give you in society 
A pleasant notoriety?
"I cannot help it: I am weeping . . .
If you recall your Tanya still,
xlv One thought I would that you were keeping
In mind: that if I had my will,
I would prefer your harsh cold fashion
Of speech to this insulting passion.
To these long letters and these tears.
My childish dreams, my tender years,
Aroused your pity then . . . You’re kneeling 
Here at my feet. But dare you say 
In truth what brought you here today? 
What petty thought? What trivial feeling? 
Can you, so generous, so keen.
Be ruled by what is small and mean?
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
'^To me, Onegin, all these splendors.
The tinsel of unwelcome days,
xlvi The homage that the gay world tenders,
My handsome house and my soirees —
To me all this is naught. This minute
I’d give my house and all that’s in it.
This giddy play in fancy-dress.
For a few books, a wilderness
Of jdowers, for our modest dwelling.
The scene where first I saw your face,
Onegin, that familiar place.
And for the simple churchyard, telling
Its tale of humble lives, where now 
My poor nurse sleeps beneath the bough . . .
'^And happiness, before it glided
Away forever, was so near! . . . 
xlvii But now my fate is quite decided.
I was in too much haste, I fear;
My mother coaxed and wept; the sequel
You know; besides, all lots were equal 
To hapless Tanya . . . Well, and so 
I married. Now, I beg you, go.
I know your heart; I need not tremble.
Because your honor and your pride 
Must in this matter be your guide.
I love you (why should I dissemble?)
But I became another’s wife;
I shall be true to him through life.”
She went. Onegin stood forsaken,
Stood thunderstruck. He could not stir.
xlviii By what a storm his heart was shaken:
What pride, what grief, what thoughts of her!
But are those stirrups he is hearing?
Tatyana’s husband is appearing.
At this unlucky moment, we
Must leave my hero, ruefully,
For a long time . . . indeed, forever.
Together we have traveled far.
Congratulations! Now we are 
Ashore at last, and our endeavor 
Accomplished in the end. Three cheers!
You’ll grant it’s time to part, my dears.
Eugene Onegin: Chapter Eight
Whoever you may be, my reader,
Ally or enemy, attend
xlix The words of this most earnest pleader:
Pray say farewell as to a friend.
Whatever in these careless stanzas
You seek: be it extravaganzas 
Of memory, or welcome rest,
A living picture, or a jest.
Or merely some mistakes in grammar,
God grant you find some trifle here
To earn a smile, a dream, a tear.
Or rouse a journalistic clamor.
And now, since I’ve no more to tell,
I take my leave of you — farewell.
You too, farewell, my curious neighbor.
And you, my fair ideal, too,
I And you, small fruit of eager labor:
My little book. With you I knew
The truest source of inspiration:
The world’s oblivious animation.
And talk that brighten’s friendship’s ways.
How many swiftly flitting days 
Have passed since in a hazy vision 
I first saw young Tatyana glide 
With her Onegin at her side —
Ere yet the crystal with precision
Had shown to my enchanted glance 
The vista of a free romance!
But those good friends who were insistent
That the first strophes should be read 
li To them . . . alas, some now are distant,
Some are no more, as Saadi said.
Onegin’s portrait has been finished,
But, lacking them, the joy’s diminished;
And she — she who for Tanya posed . . . 
How many chapters Fate has closed! 
Blessed is he who leaves the glory 
Of life’s gay feast ere time is up,
Who does not drain the brimming cup,
Nor read the ending of the story.
But drops it without more ado.
As, my Onegin, I drop you.
Excerpts
FROM
Oneginas Travels
The last chapter of Eugene Onegin was published
separately, with the following Foreword:
'^The omitted stanzas have repeatedly given occa-
sion to reproaches and to gibes (which were, however, 
very just and witty). The author frankly confesses 
that he had left out of his novel an entire chapter, 
which described Onegin’s travels in Russia. It was for 
him to indicate the omitted chapter by dots or a 
numeral; but, to avoid scandal, he decided to number 
the last chapter of Eugene Onegin 'eight’ instead of 
'nine,’ and to sacrifice one of the final stanzas:
’Tis time: my pen wants rest from driving:
I’ve finished cantos nine, no more;
With the ninth wave the ship’s arriving
In triumph at the joyous shore;
And so all hail to you, nine Muses, etc.”
P. A. Katenin (who is not prevented by his ad-
mirable poetic talent from being a fine critic) has 
pointed out to us that the omission, though perhaps 
advantageous to readers, nevertheless injures the 
plan of the whole composition; for, as a result, the 
transition from Tatyana, the provincial miss, to 
Tatyana, the society lady, is unexplained and too 
sudden. An observation betokening an experienced 
artist. The author himself felt the justice of it, but he 
had resolved to omit this chapter for reasons impor- 
tant to him, not to the public. Some fragments of it 
have been printed; we are reproducing them here, 
adding several stanzas to them.
EUGENE ONEGIN GOES
FROM MOSCOW TO NIZHNI -NOVGOROD:
• . . and there
Before him, loud with seething trajfl&c,
Lies spread the famous annual fair.
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Europe has spurious wines to offer;
The Hindu — diamonds in his coffer;
Here too the plainsman comes and brags,
Hoping to sell his worthless nags;
The sharks who feed on gamblers’ passions
Have cards and dice; and not for naught 
The landed gentleman has brought 
Ripe daughters, dressed in last year’s fashions. 
All hustle, bustle, tell great lies,
And show commercial enterprise.
How dismal!
ONEGIN TRAVELS TO ASTRAKHAN,
AND FROM THERE TO THE CAUCASUS:
He sees the self-willed Terek flinging
Its waves on shores that rise up sheer;
2 Ahead, a royal eagle winging;
With lowered horns, a lonely deer;
In the steep shade a camel lying;
There a Circassian’s horse goes flying;
While round the tents that nomads raise
The Kalmucks’ flocks, contented, graze. 
Beyond, the Caucasus’ tall masses,
A barrier that is no more,
A frontier shattered by the war
That riots through the mountain passes;
And Kura’s and Ajragva’s banks
Behold the Russian tents in ranks.
Beshtau, the sharp-peaked, the eternal
Custodian of the desert, fills
3 The background, and Mashuk, the vernal.
Towers above the craggy hills,
Mashuk, most health-giving of mountains;
About its magic healing fountains,
A pallid swarm, the patients pour:
Some, honor’s victims, scarred by war,
Some, prey to piles, or Aphrodite;
The weak would mend life’s fraying thread;
The insults time heaps on her head 
Are here cast off, or so the flighty 
Coquette believes; the old man dreams 
Of youth renewed beside these streams.
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Absorbed in bitter meditation
Amidst this dreary family,
4 Onegin’s wistful observation
Rests on the smoky streams, and he 
Thinks sadly: ''Why am I not ailing.
Say, from a bullet-wound? Or failing.
Like this decrepit publican?
Why not, like that poor Tula man.
The old assessor, paralytic?
Why don’t I travel with a crutch.
Or in the shoulder feel a touch
At least of some complaint arthritic?
How dismal to be sturdy. Lord,
How dismal to be young, and bored!”
THEN ONEGIN VISITS TAURIS:
A land imagination hallows:
Orestes vied there with his friend,
5 There Mithridates sought his end.
And there beside the rocky shallows
Inspired Mickiewicz used to stand 
And dream about his native land.
Ah, you are lovely, shores of Tauris,
From shipboard looming on the sight
6 As first I saw you there before us
At dawn, by Cytherea’s light.
You shone as with a nuptial splendor:
Upon the azure, pale and tender.
The masses of your mountains gleamed,
And valleys, trees, and hamlets seemed 
A pattern spread; and soon what yearning 
Possessed me, underneath your spell, 
Among the huts where Tartars dwell . . . 
How ardently this breast was burning! 
What anguished longing held me fast!
But, Muse, you must forget the past.
Forget the feelings that held riot
Within me — they have found surcease:
7 I am an altered man and quiet.
Ye vanished tumults, rest in peace!
Then I required, as I protested,
Vast wastes, and billows diamond-crested.
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
Steep cliffs above the ocean’s purl,
The vision of a peerless girl,
Strange woes that left me broken-hearted . . .
With other days come other dreams,
And with my vanished spring, it seems,
My high-flown fancies have departed.
By now the wine of poesy
Has been diluted heavily.
Now different scenes delight my senses:
A gentle sandy slope will please,
8 A wicket-gate and broken fences,
A cottage with two rowan trees,
Gray skies, and heaps of straw in billows
Before the threshing-floor, thick willows 
Whose shade across the mill-pond lies 
That forms the ducklings’ paradise.
A balalaika gives me pleasure,
And at the tavern-door the clack
And drunken stamp of the trepak,
A housewife seems a perfect treasure!
I want my peace, my pot of stchi.
And my own man I want to be.
The other day in rainy weather
I strolled into the farmyard — faugh!
9 What prosy rubbish altogether.
Stuff that the Flemish school would draw.
In youth, were such the joys I’d count on?
Reply, Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain!
Pray, did your ceaseless clamor start
Such feelings in this troubled heart,
When mutely on your brink I pondered
Upon Zarema? To the same 
Rich empty rooms Onegin came 
When I was gone three years, and wandered 
Among those regions drearily.
And thought, I do not doubt, of me.
Odessa was my home then, shrouded
In dust . . . But there the skies are bright; 
With sails and rich thick traflic crowded,
The harbor is a busy sight;
The city breathes of Europe; hotly.
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
On scenes both various and motley.
Shines the resplendent southern sun —
On everything and everyone:
You hear amid the gay street’s fluster
The golden tongue Italians speak;
Armenian, Spaniard, Frenchman, Greek,
Proud Slav and stout Moldavian muster;
And strolling with the throng you’ll view
Egypt’s retired corsair too.
Tumansky in sonorous stanzas
Described the town; we must admit.
When writing his extravaganzas
He turned a partial eye on it.
Lorgnette in hand, our friend would wander,
A veritable poet, yonder.
Alone along the sea-shore; then
He’d take his fascinating pen 
And praise Odessa’s gardens greatly.
That’s fine, but if the truth were told.
Bare steppe is all you will behold;
Just here and there hard labor lately
Compelled young boughs, in sultry heat,
To cast forced shade upon the street.
But where is my disjointed story?
I called Odessa dusty —
Don’t aim to cover it with glory:
To call it dirty is no lie.
Storm-giver Zeus decrees Odessa
For six weeks yearly be a mess, a 
Town that’s delivered to the flood,
Drenched, deluged, choked with viscous mud;
Immersed in it the houses founder;
On stilts the bold pedestrian
Wades through the streets, if he but can;
Both carriages and people flounder.
The ox with lowered horns must drag
The cab, to spare the feeble nag.
But now the heavy hammer’s pounding
Away already: without fail.
The city soon will wear resounding
Hard pavements, like a coat of mail.
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
And yet Odessa, our wet city,
Wants one thing further, more’s the pity;
What is it? Water! And this lack 
Means labor fit to break the back . . .
No matter. Why should we be asking
For such mere trifles? Why repine 
When there’s no duty on the wine?
The sea, the southern sun for basking . . .
What more, my friends, do you demand? 
Truly, a beatific land.
No sooner did the cannon, sounding
From shipboard, thunder dawn, than I, 
Abruptly down the incline bounding,
To the inviting sea would fly.
And then, refreshed after a dipping,
With pipe alight you’d find me sipping
Thick coffee Orientals prize:
A Moslem in his paradise.
I take a stroll. Now cups are clinking
At the casino cosily;
The marker on the balcony
Appears, his broom in hand, still blinking;
Below, though it is early yet,
Two merchants have already met.
The square grows lively now and dizzy
With motley figures: people dart
15 About, some idle and some busy,
But business holds the greater part.
The child of shrewdness and of daring,
The merchant, to the port is faring 
To scan the flags and see what sails 
Announce the coming of his bales.
Have they arrived? His calculations
Were set upon those casks of wine.
What shipments are in quarantine?
Have there been any conflagrations?
What talk of famine, plague, or war?
Such is the news he’s eager for.
We careless fellows leave the fretting
To merchants; we have but one fear:
1 6 The load of oysters they were getting
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
From Istamboul may not be here.
The oysters? They have come! In rapture
Forth rushes greedy youth to capture 
Those fleshy anchorites alive 
And gulp them down as they arrive,
Just for a dash of lemon waiting.
Noise, chatter, on the table shine
Bottles of cellar-cooled light wine:
Oton is so accommodating.
The flying hours no one counts.
The fearful bill, unheeded, mounts.
But now the blue of evening darkens.
The opera summons — in a word,
1 7 The Orpheus to whom Europe hearkens.
Her pet, Rossini, must be heard.
Let critics carp, he will not grovel:
Always the same and always novel.
He pours out fluent melodies;
They glow, they burn, the ecstasies
They rouse are those of youthful kisses, 
The languor and the flame of love 
Are in them, and the sparkle of 
Ay, when, foaming gold, it hisses . . .
But, gentlemen, you may decline
To liken do-re-mi to wine.
Is it the music’s fascination
Alone? What of the eye-glass, eh?
18 Behind the scenes, the assignation?
The prima donna? The ballet?
The box, where, regnant in her splendor.
The merchant’s wife, so young and slender. 
Displays her languor and her pride 
To crowding slaves on every side?
She hears and does not hear the closing
Smooth aria, the eager plea.
The jesting mixed with flattery . . .
Her husband, in the corner, dozing,
Shouts bravo in his sleep, and then
He yawns and starts to snore again.
The loud finale sounds, and pushing,
With noisy haste the throng decamps;
Eugene Onegin: Excerpts
19 Into the square the crowd is rushing,
Beneath the light of stars and lamps.
Ausonia’s happy sons are trilling 
A merry tune that, all unwilling,
They learned, and we, before we leave.
Are roaring the recitative.
It’s late. Odessa sleeps, unruffled;
No breath disturbs the warm still night.
The moon has risen; in a light 
Transparent veil the sky is muffled.
No sound, save for the soft slow roar
Of the Black Sea upon the shore.
And so, my home was then Odessa . . .
Pushkin provided the novel with a number of notes,
not all of which it seemed necessary to reproduce 
Notes here. Those not marked ^'Pushkin” have been added
by the editor, to assist the foreign reader.
The editor has followed closely the text of the first
edition, prepared for the press by the author in 1833; 
advantage has been taken of a few emendations ap- 
pearing in later editions.
The dedication is addressed to Pyotr Alexandro-
vich Pletnyov.
Chapter I
Stanza //, Line 5. Ruslan and Ludmila: hero and
heroine of Pushkin’s first narrative poem.
Line 14* Written during the author’s exile in Bess-
arabia.
Stanza IX. In preparing the text for the press
Pushkin occasionally omitted one or more stanzas, or 
left one unfinished, indicating the gap either by dots 
or by giving merely the number of the stanza. It is 
not clear what moved him to make these omissions. 
Fear of censorship seems to have been a minor factor; 
he may have wished thus to tease the reader’s imagi- 
nation. Some of the stanzas seem not to have been 
written at all. For a sample of the material that 
Pushkin discarded, see Note to Chapter VI, Stanza
Stanza XI I ^ Line 10. Faublas: the rakish hero of a
novel by Louvet de Couvrai, an eighteenth-century 
French writer.
Stanza XV ^ Line 10. Bolivar: a black silk top hat,
named after the South American liberator, which was 
affected by liberal-minded fashionables in the early 
twenties of the century.
Line 13. Breguet: a repeater which took its name
from a famous watch-maker of the period.
Stanza XVI, Line 5. Talon: a well-known restau-
rateur. — Pushkin.
Line 6. Kaverin: an officer of the Hussars who,
like his close friend, Pushkin, was addicted to both 
good living and high thinking. The name does not 
figure in the early editions.
Line 8. There was an exceptionally fine vintage in
Eugene Onegin: Notes
1811, a year which was also marked by the appear-
ance of a comet.
Stanza XVIIL Fonvizin and Knyazhnin were
eighteenth-century playwrights, the first a satirist of 
a liberal temper, the second having the reputation of 
^“^the Russian Racine.” Semyonova, an actress who 
played Shakespearean roles and acted in the tragedies 
written by Ozerov, a dramatist who belonged to the 
generation that preceded Pushkin’s. Katenin, a friend 
of Pushkin’s, translated French tragedies, while Shak- 
hovskoy was a prolific author of comedies; both men 
were somewhat older than Pushkin. Didelot was a 
French choreographer established in Russia.
Stanza XX, Line 8, Istomina: a celebrated bal-
lerina; she danced in a ballet, arranged by Didelot, 
based on Pushkin’s poem, ’^The Caucasian Prisoner.”
Stanza XXI, Line 14- An instance of chilled senti-
ment worthy of Childe Harold. M. Didelot’s ballets 
are full of lively imagination and extraordinary 
charm. One of our romantic writers found much more 
poetry in them than in the whole of French literature. 
— ^Pushkin.
Stanza XXIV, Line 11. To this passage Pushkin
attached a note in which, after quoting some relevant 
lines from Rousseau’s Confessions, he wrote: ^’Grimm 
was in advance of his age; nowadays, throughout 
enlightened Europe, nails are cleaned with a special 
little brush.”
Stanza XXV, Line 5. Chadayev (Chaadayev): the
name of another friend of Pushkin’s which is absent 
from the early editions; the Russian Beau Brummel; 
the Russian ambassador to France is supposed to 
have said that Chaadayev should be exhibited in 
every capital so as to show the Europeans "un russe 
parfaitement comme ilfauV^
Stanza XLII. This entire ironic stanza is nothing
but subtle praise of our fair compatriots. Thus Boileau, 
in the guise of reproach, lauds Louis XIV. Our ladies 
combine enlightenment with amiability, and strict 
moral purity with that Oriental charm which so cap- 
tivated Mme. de Sta9. — Pushkin.
Stanza XLVIII, Line 3. The bard: ^’An ecstatic
poet” mentioned in a lyric entitled, ”To the Goddess 
of the Neva,” by Muravyov.
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Stanza XLIX, Line 6. The reference is to Byron.
Stanza L, Line 3. The beach: written at Odessa,
on the Black Sea, when the author was in quasi-exile.
Line 10. On his mother’s side, the author is of
African origin. His great-grandfather, Abram Petro- 
vich Annibal, at the age of eight was kidnapped from 
the shores of Africa and taken to Constantinople. 
The Russian envoy rescued him and sent hi m as a 
gift to Peter the Great, who had him baptized at 
Wilno. His brother went to Constantinople and after- 
wards to St. Petersburg, offering a ransom for him, 
but Peter I did not agree to return his godson. Till a 
very advanced age Annibal remembered Africa, his 
father’s luxurious life, his nineteen brothers — he was 
himself the youngest boy; he remembered how they 
would be brought to their father, their hands tied 
behind their backs, while he alone was free, swimming 
where the fountains of the paternal home were play- 
ing; he also remembered his favorite sister. Lagan, 
who, at a distance, swam after the ship in which he 
was being carried off.
At the age of eighteen Annibal was sent by the
Czar to France, where he began his service in the 
Regent’s army; he returned to Russia with a split 
head and the rank of lieutenant in the French army. 
From then on he never left the Emperor’s side. In 
Anna’s reign, Annibal, who had incurred Biihren’s 
personal enmity, was transferred to Siberia under a 
specious pretext. Wearied by the lack of companion- 
ship and the inclemency of the climate, he returned 
to Petersburg without leave and went straight to his 
friend, Miinnich. Miinnich was amazed and advised 
him to go into hiding immediately. Annibal retired to 
his estates, where he lived throughout the remaining 
years of Anna’s reign, nominally considered to be 
serving in Siberia. Empress Elizabeth, on ascending 
the throne, showered him with favors. He retired from 
service with the rank of General-in-Chief, and died in 
Catherine’s reign at the age of ninety-two.
In Russia, where for lack of historical memoirs,
the remembrance of remarkable men soon vanishes, 
Annibal’s curious life is known only from stories pre- 
served by the family. (In time we expect to publish a 
complete biography of him. Footnote.)
Eugene Onegin: Notes
His son, Lieutenant General I. A. Annibal, was
unquestionably among the most distinguished men of 
the age of Catherine (he died in 1800). — Pushkin.
Stanza LVII^ Lines 9-10, The reference is to the
heroines of two of Pushkin’s narrative poems: ''The 
Prisoner of the Caucasus,” and "The Fountain of 
Bakhchi-Sarai.”
Chapter II
Stanza F, Line 9. A mason: freemason; the term
carried with it a suggestion of subversive tendencies.
Stanza XXIV, Lines 2-9, Among us, euphonious
Greek names, as, for example, Agathon, Philat, Theo- 
dora, Thekla, are used only by the common people.
— Pushkin.
Chapter III
Stanza V, Line 3, Svetlana: the heroine of a ballad
by Zhukovsky, an older friend of Pushkin’s.
Stanza IX, Lines 7-8, Malek-Adhel: the hero of a
novel by Mme. Cottin, an eighteenth-century writer; 
Gustave de Linar: a character in Valerie, a novel by 
Baroness Barbara von Kriidener; St. Preux and Wol- 
mar: characters in La Nouvelle Heloise, by Rousseau.
Stanza X, Line 4, Julie: the heroine of La Nouvelle
Heloise; Clarissa: the heroine of Clarissa Harlotve; 
Delphine: the leading character in a novel of the same 
name by Mme. de StaS.
Stanza XII, Lines 7-11, Melmoth: the reference is
to Maturin’s Melmoth, the Wanderer; Jean Sbogar: a 
novel by Charles Nodier.
Stanza XXVII, Line 4. In the original the Moscow
magazine is named; it was The Well-Intentioned.
Stanza XXIX, Line 8, The original refers ex-
plicitly to the verse of Bogdanovich, an eighteenth- 
century poet who aimed to amuse.
Stanza XXX. The reference is to Baratynsky, an
important minor poet and a friend of Pushkin’s. For 
some misdemeanor, he was expelled from the Corps of 
Pages and sent to Finland to serve as a private.
Chapter IV
Stanza VII, Lines 1-2. Here Pushkin is para-
phrasing a remark he made in a letter written from
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Kishinev in the autumn of 1822 to his brother; "/e
vous observerai seulement que moins on aime une femme
et plus on est sur de VavoirJ*^
Stanza XXX, Line 6. Tolstoy: F. P. Tolstoy, an
artist of the period.
Stanza XXXI, Line 9. Yazykov: a lyricist of
Pushkin’s day.
Stanza XXXII. The reference is to Wilhelm
Kuchelbecker, a schoolmate of Pushkin’s who was a 
minor poet and author of an essay in praise of the ode.
Line 10. The emblems of the classical stage.
Stanza XXXIII, Line 5. Ivan Dmitriyev: a fabu-
list, author of a satire on writers of odes.
Stanza XLII, Line 8. ^^This means,” observes one
of our critics, ”that boys are ice-skating.” Right.
— Pushkin.
Stanza XLIII, Line 10. Dominique de Pradt, a
French prelate who was Napoleon’s chaplain; his 
political writings were popular in Russia.
Stanza L, Line 12. The reference is to August
Lafontaine, a German writer of the period who pro- 
duced one hundred and fifty sentimental novels.
Chapter V
Stanza III, Lines 5-7. See ”First Snow,” a poem
by Prince Vyazemsky. — Pushkin.
Lines 13-14. See the description of the Finnish
winter in Baratynsky’s ”Eda.” — Pushkin.
Stanza VIII, Lines 9-14. The first song is an omen
of death, while Pussy foretells a wedding. Its opening 
lines run:
The tom-cat calls the tabby
To sleep upon the stove.
Stanza IX. The girl is supposed to see her future
husband in the mirror, and to learn his name from the 
stranger she accosts.
Stanza X, Line 6. In Zhukovsky’s ballad, ^^Svet-
lana,” the heroine makes the same preparations that 
Tatyana does, expecting that the mirror will reflect 
the image of her future husband as his spirit takes a 
place opposite her at the table; she falls asleep, and 
has a terrifying dream.
Line 11. Lei: a Slavonic divinity, of dubious
authenticity, presiding over married love.
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Stanza XXI I ^ Line 13. With us, fortune -books are
published under the imprint of Martin Zadeka, a 
worthy man, who, as B. M. Fyedorov points out, 
never wrote fortune-books himself. — Pushkin.
Stanza XX/JJ, Line 5. Malvine: a novel by Mme.
Cottin.
Line 9. Two Petriads: poems about Peter the
Great by Shirinsky-Shikhmatov and Gruzintzev.
Stanza XXVI ^ Lines 9-10. Buyanov: a character
in a poem by Pushkin’s uncle, whence the cousinship.
Stanza XXVII, Line 8. The song is by Charles
Dufresny, 1654-1724.
Stanza XXXII, Line 11. Zizi: Yevpraxiya Wulf,
a rather plump young girl with whom Pushkin con- 
ducted a flirtation when he was confined to the family 
estate at Mikhailovskoe. In a letter to his brother he 
wrote: '^The other day Yevpraxiya and I compared 
the sizes of our waists and found them to be identical. 
Consequently, either I have the girth of a fifteen- 
year-old girl or she has that of a twenty -five-year-old 
man.”
Stanza XXXVI, Line 8. See Note to Stanza XV,
Chapter I.
Stanza XL, Line 4. The reference is to Francesco
Albani, an Italian painter of the seventeenth century, 
whom Pushkin admired.
Chapter VI
Stanza V, Line 13. The reference is to Very Freres,
a celebrated restaurant in the Paris of the period.
Stanza XV. This discarded stanza is extant in ms.,
and reads as follows:
Yes, jealousy’s attacks can seize us
Like any illness: spleen, or plague;
Like fevers it can burn and freeze us.
Like madness make us wild and vague;
It causes frenzy, aberrations.
And nightmares and hallucinations.
Lord help us, friends! To be accursed
This way is of all fates the worst.
No punishment is equal to it.
Its fateful harassments indeed
Are such a man would rather bleed
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Than face them; he who has gone through it
Will bravely face the stake, nor wax 
Afraid before the headsman’s axe.
Stanza XX, Line 14, Anton Delwig, a minor poet,
was a schoolmate and an intimate friend of Pushkin’s.
Stanza XXF, Line 13. Lepage: a famous gun-
smith. — Pushkin.
Chapter VII
Stanza /F, Line 4. Levshin: author of many works
on rural economy. — Pushkin.
Stanza X/X, Lines 12-14, The statuette is of
Napoleon.
Stanza XXI, Originally this stanza ended differ-
ently and was followed in the manuscript by a de- 
scription of Onegin’s ^^Album,” '^a note-book of rev- 
eries and pranks,” together with some excerpts from 
it. The last of these reads:
It was today I met the beauty;
I watched her spouse, with time to spare;
He’s dignified, he dyes his hair.
And for his mind, his rank does duty.
Stanza XXI I ^ Lines 6-14. It is believed that one
of these novels was Adolphe^ by Benjamin Constant.
Stanza XXI Line 10, The reference is to Childe
Harold.
Stanza XXX F, Line 8. A simile borrowed from
K., who is so well known for the playfulness of his 
imagination. K. used to relate that having once been 
dispatched by Prince Potemkin to the Empress as a 
courier, he drove so fast that his sword, sticking out 
of the carriage, was knocking against the mile-posts 
as against a fence. — Pushkin.
Stanza XXXFII. The Petrovsky Palace, just out-
side of Moscow, was the place where Napoleon found 
refuge from the fires that were ravaging the city.
Stanza XLIX^ Line 1. The reference is to a select
group of young highbrows who served in the Moscow 
Archives of the Foreign Office.
Line 9, The poet is presumably referring to Prince
Pyotr Vyazemsky, a minor author and brilliant con- 
versationalist, who was a life-long friend of his.
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Chapter VIII
Stanzas I-V are romanticized autobiography.
Stanza //, Line 3. The reference is to the examina-
tion at the Lyceum when Pushkin, as a boy of sixteen, 
received, for a poem of his own composition, the con- 
gratulations of the venerable poet, Derzhavin, who 
was among those present.
Stanza /F, Line 7. Lenore: the heroine of Burger’s
ballad of that title.
Stanza X///, Line 13. Chatzky: a character in
Griboyedov’s famous comedy, Woe From Wit.
Stanza X/F, Line 13. Shishkov: a vice-admiral
who held various posts, including that of Minister of 
Education; he was a stickler for purity in language. 
Early editors substituted this name for the asterisks 
in the first edition. It is possible, however, that Push- 
kin was addressing not Shishkov, but Wilhelm, that 
is, Wilhelm Kuchelbecker, the schoolmate mentioned 
above.
Stanza XF/, Line 10. Nina Voronskaya has been
variously identified as Countess E. M. Zavodovskaya, 
and as an eccentric beauty, A. F. Zakrevskaya, with 
whom Pushkin was at one time in love.
Stanza XX FJ, Line 4. Count Emmanuel St.
Priest was a caricaturist of the period.
Lines 9-10. It has been conjectured that the refer-
ence is to Thomas Raikes, an Englishman who met 
Pushkin in St. Petersburg in 1829, and commented on 
the poet’s slovenly appearance.
Stanza XXX F, Line 3. Chamfort: an eighteenth-
century French author, known for his aphorisms.
Line 4. Bichat: an eighteenth-century French
physiologist; Tissot: a French historian of the period.
Stanza XXX F///, Line 12. Idol mio: the first
words of a refrain in a duettino by Vincenzo Gabussi; 
Benedetta sia la madre: a Venetian baracarolle.
Stanza X, Lines 1~2. The reference is to Onegin
and Tatyana.
Lines 8-14. Pushkin spent eight years on the
writing of Eugene Onegin.
Stanza X/, Lines 3-4. This is a veiled allusion to
the author’s friends among the exiled or executed 
Decembrists. The saying has not been found in the 
Persian poet’s writings.
Eugene Onegin: Notes
Excerpts from Onegin's Travels
Page 159. '^Orestes vied there with his friend”:
the story goes that Orestes and Pylades, having 
arrived among the savage Tauri, who were in the 
habit of sacrificing strangers to Artemis, contended as 
to which of them should be the victim, each striving 
to save the other.
’^"There Mithridates sought his end”: when Push-
kin was traveling in the Crimea in 1820 he visited the 
reputed ruins of the tomb of Mithridates, the king of 
Pontus, who committed suicide.
"Inspired Mickiewicz”: Adam Mickiewicz, the
Polish poet, visited the Crimea in 1825, and there 
wrote a group of "Crimean Sonnets.”
Page 160. trepak'^: a boisterous peasant dance.
"stc/ii” (or shchee) : a vegetable soup, usually made
of cabbage.
Page 160. "Bakhchi-Sarai’s sad fountain”: the so-
called fountain of tears, in the palace of the Khan of 
the Crimea, erected by him in memory of a captive 
whom he loved and who was slain by a jealous wife.
"Zarema”: the Khan’s jealous wife, who figures in
Pushkin’s poem, "The Fountain of Bakhchi-Sarai.”
Page 161. "Egypt’s retired corsair”: during his
stay in Odessa, Pushkin struck up an acquaintance 
with a seaman, referred to in the original as Morali 
(Moor Ali). It was rumored that he had been an 
Egyptian pirate, but he was more probably a Moorish 
skipper. "He is a man after my own heart,” Pushkin 
told a friend; "who knows, perhaps my grandfather 
was closely related to his ancestors.” He meant, of 
course, his great-grandfather Hannibal, the alleged 
Ethiopian.
Page 161. Tumansky: Vasily Ivanovich Tuman-
sky, a minor poet, who was living in Odessa at the 
time of Pushkin’s enforced stay there.
Page 163. Oton: Cesar Oton kept an inn at which
Pushkin stopped when he first arrived in Odessa.
Page 163. "Shouts bravo in his sleep”: in the
original the husband shouts, "fora!”, the Italian cry 
of approval current in Russia at the time.
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
Appendix
The story of these fragmentary stanzas,
which have been preserved in a secret 
code, is told in the Introduction.
A monarch weak and also cunning,
A fop gone bald, toil’s arrant foe.
Whom fame had, by strange chance, been sunning.
Was then our ruler, as you know.
He looked more crestfallen than regal
When all the foreign cooks were bent 
On plucking the two-headed eagle 
Not far from Bonaparte’s tent.
And who, then, came to our assistance
When we were bowed beneath the rod 
In 1812 ? The folk’s resistance,
The winter, Barclay, Russia’s God?
God helped; complaints did not embarrass
The State for long; the course of things 
Soon brought us, if you please, to Paris,
Where Russia’s czar was king of kings.
This warlike rover who was fated
To humble kings and make them fawn.
This horseman the Pope consecrated,
Who vanished like the shades of dawn . . .
9|« ^ 9l<
By rest, a novel torment, punished . . .
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
First Spain was rocked by storm, and, second.
Volcanic Naples broke the peace,
And now the one-armed prince had beckoned
From Kishinev to friends of Greece.
This whiskered regiment diverted
The mighty Peter in his youth;
It gave the tyrant it deserted
To his assassins without ruth.
Then Russia did as she was bidden.
The czar caroused with zest, but mark!
From other fires that had been hidden
Long years, maybe, a sudden spark . . .
They had their private meetings, whether
Over a friendly glass of wine.
Or native vodka, all together . . .
Renowned for trenchant oratory.
The family would meet and talk,
Nikita, restless, keen for glory,
Ilya, the cautious, prone to balk.
The friend of Bacchus, Mars, and Venus,
Here Lunin spoke impressively,
From hesitancy strove to wean us.
Then muttered on in ecstasy.
Here Pushkin read his verse with swagger.
And here the regicidal dagger 
The sad Yakushkin, it would seem,
Bared silently, as in a dream.
The lame Turgenev for his nation
Alone had eyes, and every speech 
For him one moral had to teach;
His object was emancipation.
And in these nobles he would see
The men who’d set the peasants free.
Chapter Ten: A Fragment
So things went on beside the chilly
Neva, but in those warmer climes 
Of Kamenka’s deep groves and hilly 
Tulchin, where the Spring shines betimes. 
Upon the banks by Dnieper raided,
Upon the steppes that it invaded,
The very plains where Wittgenstein
Drew up his regiments in line.
There other things were done and bruited.
There Pestel ... for the tyrants . . .
There the impassive general
For the United Slavs recruited.
There Muravyov showed pluck and force,
And urged along the outbreak’s course.
At first these were but machinations
Between Lafitte and Veuve Cliquot, 
Debates and friendly conversations;
The science of revolt was slow
To make a lasting deep impression.
All this was but the bored profession
Of idle youth that no one blames,
Just grown-up mischief-makers’ games.
It seemed so, but . . .
. . . cell joined to cell . . .
And slowly by a secret network
All Russia . . .
Our Czar was dozing . . .
